5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva


business

Is it OK to take news stories and feed them to AI bots? Tech companies say it is - and journalists are worried
The Toronto Star
1696 words
5 July 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

On Nov. 30, 2022, San-Francisco-based OpenAI released ChatGPT , a chatbot capable of generating text almost indistinguishable from that written by a human. It wasn't perfect - the
bot had
a tendency to "hallucinate facts" - but still prompted journalists to wonder whether the bot might eventually take their jobs.
At least journalists could take comfort in the fact that they had something ChatGPT didn't: currency. Back in 2022, the AI chatbot couldn't access real-time information, having only
been trained on information up until September 2021.
That all changed in September 2023, when OpenAI announced that the chatbot was now up to date. Users could ask the bot questions about current affairs.
Later that year, the New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft, alleging in a court filing that the tech companies had unlawfully used the Times' copyrighted articles to train its
software. Microsoft and OpenAI sought to "free-ride on the Times' massive investment in its journalism ... without permission or payment," reads the complaint.
The lawsuit added an additional layer of complexity to the discussion surrounding journalism and AI: the technology posed a threat not only to individual journalists and their
livelihoods, but also to the field itself, by providing access to hard-won articles for free.
The chatbot's outputs were "similar, but not identical" to Times articles, responded OpenAI in a motion. "Contrary to the allegations in the Complaint, ChatGPT is not in any way a
substitute for a subscription to the New York Times," the motion notes. "One cannot use ChatGPT to serve up Times articles at will."
The motion added that it is "perfectly lawful to use copyrighted content as part of a technological process that (as here) results in the creation of new, different and innovative products."
Journalism advocates are not convinced.
Generative AI is a threat to journalism and everything it stands for, said Courtney Radsch, director of the Center for Journalism and Liberty at the Open Markets Institute, a
Washington, D.C.-based non-profit. In an interview with the
Star, Radsch argues that AI companies are operating on a "model of theft"
- and getting away with it.
Legislators need to step up, Radsch said, otherwise journalism 's business model - and subsequently democracy - will be at risk.
What's the problem?
Artificial intelligence systems are built on the theft of intellectual property from publishers - from the news sector.
Journalism is a core and fundamentally important part of the training sets and models that underlie AI systems. It is essential to make AI applications like search, chatbots
and other sorts of products and services that rely on contextually accurate, timely, relevant information.
And yet (large tech companies) are building their products and services on a model of theft. They are creating value to their investors, creating their product using journalism , and yet
they have not paid license, they have not received permission, and we know that this information is being taken from news outlets and journalists , even when it was put behind a
paywall.
If we don't address this fundamental problem with how the AI market is developing, there are a series of problems. There will be no business model for journalism , and this critical
democratic institution will devolve.
Not having journalism (in AI training) is also not the answer. If you don't include news and quality information in AI systems, if they're trained on too much synthetic data, the systems
will degrade and potentially collapse. And they will regurgitate problematic information.
How does this trend affect the average consumer?
The average consumer relies on journalism for a wide variety of things. In places where you don't have journalism , there is more corruption, more polarization, less civic discourse.
People are less informed, less able to participate as an active citizen in their democracy.
I feel like it's a little bit far removed from their realities because it's hard for people to even understand the value of journalism in their communities. A lot of times people don't
necessarily know the role that journalism plays in making their communities safer or more accountable.
Do you see any benefits of AI for journalists ?
AI has been in newsrooms for a long time. Newsrooms and journalists have been using AI to help with translation and transcription. There's all sorts of potential for AI in terms of
investigative work such as information analysis and retrieval. But I think that integrating generative AI into the newsroom in ways that replace human creativity or human ingenuity and
intelligence is problematic.
The problem is that these companies are creating partnerships with news organizations to integrate their tools into the newsroom. It's problematic because it furthers dependencies on
the same big tech platforms that strip them of their value and constrain their independence in the social media era.
Just playing devil's advocate here: Why is it so bad if journalism jobs are replaced by AI?
AI is based on prediction ; it enforces a mediocrity and genericness because, again, it's the prediction of what is most likely to occur in that string of text, or that relationship between
an image and a word. I get concerned about what that's going to do in terms of outputs ... cutting off the outer edges, the extremes. You're going to see this vast middling of human
creativity.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

1/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

If you're creating an AI, (you need to ask:) who gets published? Which ideas get published? It's overwhelmingly white, overwhelmingly male. There's a lot of familiarity with this idea
about bias and how it is replicated in systems. It goes way beyond just, say, racial bias - there's ideological bias.
Would you say generative AI is more of a threat than an advantage?
The fact is that generative AI is out there. It is a fundamental threat to the continuation of the news industry as an independent sector of the economy, and I think that it could pose a
threat to journalism as a profession and as a human endeavour, if it gets too integrated.
At the same time, there are huge opportunities to do investigations and collaborations and make sense of and discover things in data, and I think that's really interesting. I don't think
that journalism has the option to just opt out, although I think there will be news outlets and journalists that decide: our value proposition, our uniqueness, is going to be that we are
human-first, human-centred, human-only.
What should we do?
We need policymakers to step up and do their jobs. They need to clarify that copyright applies to the data used to train and develop AI systems. We need them to clarify that stealing
this data is not fair use. And we need them to impose appropriate market constraints on the power of these tech companies to just completely reconfigure our entire economic and
political system by rolling out these really powerful and dangerous products that are not ready for prime time.
In no other industry would you be able to put out a product that plagiarizes, defames and libels, and produces unsafe guidance and advice. Most other industries have testing
requirements or safety requirements. They have licensing requirements. And yet somehow we've decided that because it's tech, they're free from any sort of traditional constraints or
safeguards.
Any thoughts on the lawsuit between the New York Times and OpenAI/Microsoft?
I think it's great. I think we need a lot more lawsuits like that. What I really like about the OpenAI lawsuit is that the New York Times is asking for the destruction of the model. I think
that's very important because we have to take back power in order to control and regulate market actors.
The Federal Trade Commission in the U.S. has already used algorithmic destruction. It has forced companies that have created algorithms based on ill-gotten data or privacy-violating
data to destroy the algorithms built on that data. We should absolutely be doing the same thing for these large language models , because they're not safe and are incredibly
disruptive, and there are no safeguards and no constraints.
Is it too late to fix the problem?
I definitely think there's still time to address the core and fundamental problem; you can certainly require retroactive payment to news publishers. Then you would essentially compel
the companies to develop the technology to trace provenance and authenticity. That has all sorts of benefits.
Provenance is being able to tell where the data comes from. And if you can tell where it came from then you can determine: is it really what it is?
If you can trace the original author, website or database of that work, then you can then trace authenticity.
It will allow you to figure out who should be compensated for the use of that data.
Any final thoughts?
My big concern is that we're seeing big tech make deals with a handful of big media and everyone else is getting left behind. I know everyone is out for themselves, but that is not in the
interest of the news ecosystem, or our society more broadly. What we need is a collective industry approach.
Even the biggest, best papers and news outlets depend on local news that percolates up the ecosystem. That's why we have to have public policy options. The self-regulation,
independent licensing deals is not sufficient, and is going to ultimately be more harmful than helpful.
This interview has been edited for clarity and length.
Radsch recently presented a discussion on AI and the future of journalism to Star staff.
"In places where you don't have , there is more corruption, more polarization, less civic discourse. People are less informed, less able to participate as an active citizen in their democracy," says Courtney
Radsch, director of the Center for and Liberty at the Open Markets Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240705ek75000bm

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

2/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Technology

Nobel laureate Maria Ressa lived through the dangers of social media. She fears AI might be worse; In the first episode of
Machines Like Us, a new podcast from The Globe and Mail, the Filipino journalists talks about democracy, artificial
intelligence and why we need to regulate big tech
Globe staff
1970 words
7 May 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Artificial intelligence has disrupted the way many of us work, study and even play. The people building it are convinced it will cure cancer, turbocharge productivity and solve climate
change .
Fifteen years ago, there was a similar wave of optimism around social media, with promises of connecting the world, catalyzing social movements and spurring innovation. While it may
have delivered on some of these promises, it also made us lonelier, angrier and occasionally detached from reality.
Few people understand this trajectory better than Maria Ressa, the CEO of news organization Rappler. In 2016, she reported on how Rodrigo Duterte, then president of the
Philippines, had weaponized Facebook in the election he’d just won – and she was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2021 for using “freedom of expression to expose abuse of power,
use of violence, and growing authoritarianism in her native country.”
In the first episode of a new Globe and Mail podcast Machines Like Us [https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/machines-like-us/id1484910273] , Ms. Ressa joins host Taylor Owen to
discuss how AI’s promising future sounds all too familiar to the challenges we faced during the rise of social media.
You have spread awareness about how social media can polarize us and make us more radical. What do you think of artificial intelligence ?
I’ve become far more cynical, because I think what I used to dismiss as naiveté is now quite dangerous for the world. And generative AI , it makes me crazy. First, let’s say that in How
to Stand up to a Dictator, the book that I wrote [https://www.harpercollins.com/products/how-to-stand-up-to-a-dictator-maria-ressa?variant=41038093352994] , there were two men that
I actually focused on. The dictator, like Duterte, but the bigger one was Mark Zuckerberg, because his power is global in scope. And it makes me crazy that there was absolutely no
responsibility for it.
If you look at the new round, these are similar companies. They’re the same companies in some cases. If you look at large language models and generative AI and look at the idea,
which is speculative in nature. No one has actually proven yet that this will work. What we have seen with generative AI is very focused applications, largely in the medical field work,
right, which creates the promise, but they jump into it. They make large assumptions without any evidence.
When you talk about the information ecosystem. It’s a whole different ballgame from doing generative AI for radiology, which is very specific.
Should the people developing AI make the process more accountable?
Every day that democratic governments do not exercise their power to regulate and continue to cede to big tech, even now in the age of generative AI , they fall for the lobbying, and
for this idea that they don’t understand it. They don’t have to understand it, what they have to prevent are the harms. They need to step in and do this now before it gets worse.
There’s an AI startup called Replica, which is offering you a constant companion. If the first generation of AI and social media weaponized our fear, anger and hate, this one is going to
weaponize our loneliness. This is where governments, again, cannot abdicate responsibility. They cannot cede their power to regulate to the big tech companies.
It took a decade to figure out regulatory tools for social media platforms. Should governments expedite bringing in legislation to regulate artificial intelligence ?
In my Nobel lecture in 2021, I called social media a toxic sludge. Now, what’s going to happen is that you are going to have a virtual world full of not just toxic sludge, but people will not
know what’s real and what isn’t. And that will destroy trust even more.
I’ve said this so many times, without facts you can’t have truth, without truth you can’t have trust, and without trust you can’t have democracy.
What implications could AI have for trust in journalism ?
Journalism is going to die in this age. If a majority of the internet is low quality content, what happens when people tune out when they distrust everything? That was actually what the
Russians wanted to do, right? 2024 is an election year, how are we going to get people to care and understand that, despite the crap they are wading through, this is the moment when
we must organize ourselves, our own communities, to stand up for the values and the principles that are critical.
I know there’s a lot of doom and gloom, but what does a world without manipulative tech look like. Can we not make it better?
What are your thoughts on AI’s effects on search engines, which are one of the biggest tools people use to get information and news ?
What happened with AI when ChatGPT walked in, in November, 2022? When they rolled it out, they began an arms race, and so now you have 10 different large language models .
When you look at all 10 of those, none of them are transparent in what data they fed the machine. Stanford did a study that showed this. They all failed in terms of transparency.
Having said that, once search generative experience really kicks in, that will kill search traffic to news sites. So what do we do? At Rappler, we started building our own tech, building
tech for the public information ecosystem that ensures integrity of information. That should be the government’s job, frankly. But they’re not doing it right. They outsource this to private
companies driven by profit.
How should governments be thinking of their role in democratically developing technologies, such as AI?
It’s kind of like building roads. Private companies can build roads, you have public private co-operation that can do it, but this is not just roads. This literally touches the heart and mind
of every person. This is the reason why information warfare can hit at the cellular level of a democracy, because we’ve allowed private companies to do this.
I think the first step for democratic governments is that they cannot abdicate their responsibility to protect their citizens. You have to own it, you cannot outsource it to these big tech
companies. And you must limit their powers otherwise, every day that governments do not act, they lose more and more of their power.
Governments need to realize they do not want an Elon Musk, a person who has no accountability, determining whether Ukraine will be able to fight back in Russia.
They need to protect and empower the people who are building in the public interest, in meaningful ways. At least limit the private players, so they’re not experimenting in public, and
make them responsible for the harms that they have created.
You have stated many times that we are in the last moments of democracy, potentially, this year. What do you mean by that, and why is it such a perilous moment right now.?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

3/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

In 2021, I said 2024 was going to be a tipping point year, because in half of the world, more than 60 elections are being held in 50 countries around the world, and our information
ecosystem is corrupted. We are being manipulated. How do we make our choices? Why did violence happen on Jan. 6 in the United States, on Jan. 8 in Brazil? This is not a
coincidence, it is by design.
So this is the year we need to take our agency back. And I continue to appeal to those who have the power to change things right now, which are the big tech companies. Do you
really want short-term profit over the death of democracy?
We’re already a quarter of the way through the year and we’ve had a few elections already. What gives you hope that we can make these sorts of big changes this year?
Poland! In the short term, you have to appeal to the people themselves. Civic engagement is what will take us through this, and Poland is a perfect example. There was a right-wing
government that should have won. They were all set to win, but then the government in Poland passed an abortion law that was so brutal, that it brought women and youth out on the
street, and they voted! We are democratically electing authoritarian style leaders, except in countries where citizens feel their back is up against the wall.
AI has been heralded for its ability to provide custom-built answers for people’s niche and specific queries. Could that be problematic?
Every time you personalize, you tear that person away from the public sphere.
Let’s say we’re in a room full of 25 people, and you give every one of those 25 people their own reality, what they want, right? That’s not a room where we’re all together. That’s an
insane asylum.
This is the world we’re building. You need to please get up, get off your chair and talk to your family and friends. This is the year that matters.
You have been on the front lines of tech disruption in news before, when news on the internet and social media were still new. How did that shape your understanding of
journalism and its relationship to the medium?
Up until 2016, I loved technology. One of the best parts of working for CNN at that time was we were one of the 12 test bureaus. So any new tech we would test, and we were live from
everywhere. But I lived through that transition when we had a reporter and my team would have two weeks to do a story. You talk to people, you understand them, and you have two
weeks and you come out and you have a lot of stories.
Now, you don’t know who you’re getting the information from. Especially in the age when you can now create video or create audio, you can make it up! This is the reason why I know
gatekeepers are necessary. The gatekeepers are legally responsible for the public information ecosystem. News organizations are funny things because we have a set of standards
and ethics.
So, it’s funny to hear tech companies now say we can self-regulate. Well, such standards and ethics are only the first part, but we are also regulated by law. And that is the biggest
mistake, that democratic governments have made. Because big tech has moved to a place where there are far more negatives than there are positives, that they have built into the
design of these platforms.
Looking at the big picture, what can be the larger cultural impacts of this quickly developing tech?
With social media, I wish there were more academic studies about emergent human behaviour. Biologically, what happens when you are constantly on a dopamine high, when the
synapses of your brain, which are supposed to go straight, constantly turn right? So there’s an evolutionary effect. But beyond that, what does it mean for our species?
Because I think this tech we carry, the cellphone we carry around with us everywhere, it’s transforming not just our systems of governance and the way we deal with each other, but us
as a species.
This interview has been edited for length and clarity.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Nobel laureate Maria Ressa lived through the dangers of social media. She fears AI might be worse
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/parenting/article-ai-regulation-social-harm-explainer/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240507ek5700131

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

4/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Other

Technology and the law: Reining in AI’s threat to creativity; Canada needs to head off the obvious harms posed to content
creators by generative AI
The Editorial Board
731 words
25 June 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

It was a hugely disruptive communications technology that broke the grip of elites and allowed the masses access to information that had been tightly controlled.
That’s a reference, of course, to the printing press, the original information revolution . The arrival of the printing press swept away the old world of careful copying by religious orders.
In the decades that followed, the new technology also created chaos, where anyone creating an original work could see it reproduced without compensation.
The result, eventually, was the birth of modern copyright law, which struck a balance between the rights of content creators and those wanting to reproduce that content. Now, nearly
eight centuries after the invention of the printing press, artificial intelligence [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] is threatening to upend that balance.
The raw resource of artificial intelligence is text and data mining, which scrapes vast amounts of information from across the internet. That information is in turn the foundation of
generative artificial intelligence , including large language models that create a human-like response to queries.
The promise of AI is vast, but the potential drawbacks for content creators is also huge. The purpose of copyright is to foster the creation of original works by preserving the economic
benefits from doing so. To the degree that AI simply bypasses those content creators, it undermines the benefits – and imperils the act of content creation. Why pay an artist, a writer, a
journalist or any other content creator if AI can simply deliver a processed amalgam of dozens, hundreds or thousands of versions?
Court battles are already being waged. Last year, The New York Times sued OpenAI, which owns ChatGPT , and Microsoft, alleging that millions of its articles were used to create
chatbots that now compete with its efforts. Eight other U.S. newspapers launched similar litigation in April.
On the other hand, overly onerous Canadian restrictions could smother AI innovation, and allow other jurisdictions to capture the benefits of this revolutionary technology.
Is there a way (or a need) to constrain the power of AI to protect copyright, and content creators? Ottawa is in the midst of a consultation process [https://isedisde.canada.ca/site/strategic-policy-sector/en/marketplace-framework-policy/consultation-paper-consultation-copyright-age-generative-artificial-intelligence#s21] on generative AI and
copyright that examines those fundamental concerns.
One of the biggest questions is whether there should be copyright carve-outs for text and data mining. Supporters of such exceptions argue that large language models depend on
scale; data fortresses would undermine their purpose.
There is a solid case for exemptions for non-commercial operators conducting basic research on AI. The United Kingdom, for instance, has already enacted legislation that allows for
such limited exemptions, ideally with acknowledgment to those whose data has been ingested. Canada could follow suit with similar limited exemptions for non-commercial efforts to
experiment and innovate.
Broader exemptions that would allow a free-for-all for text and data mining would be foolhardy.
Supporters of a broad exemption argue that the resulting output bears little resemblance to the information scraped. The original sources can always be accessed, they say.
But to argue for a broad exemption is to ignore the clear danger that generative AI , and its ability to amalgamate and recombine vast amounts of data and serve that up easily to end
users, will simply push content creators out of public view.
And such a radical policy is unnecessary: the companies that operate AI technology can license the content they need to feed their large language models . University of Ottawa
law professor Michael Geist makes an excellent point that licensing could end up entrenching the power of big incumbents such as Google and Microsoft, since startups would not be
able to afford the cost of content licences. That problem can be addressed by setting a revenue threshold, below which licensing fees are nominal.
But it’s clear that big technology companies are creating enormous economic value using the work of (a vast number of) content creators. Canadian policy-makers need to act now to
head off the obvious harms that will result if copyright law is not updated to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Technology and the law: Reining in AI’s threat to creativity [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/editorials/articletechnology-and-the-law-reining-in-ais-threat-to-creativity/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240625ek6p001gt

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

5/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Other

Big Tech really is stealing our content, only it’s not who you think; The ‘Wild West’ days of artificial intelligence may be
drawing to a close
Andrew Coyne
1790 words
5 January 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For the past several years, the Canadian news media has been working hard to persuade you that Big Tech has been stealing our content – by linking to it.
How posting links to our content – links that not only advertise it to millions of readers every day, but whisk them to it with the click of a mouse; links that cost us nothing and pay us
hundreds of millions of dollars annually; links that we ourselves post, and beg others to post – could be equated to theft has never quite been explained.
But the industry really seems to have convinced itself of it. If the news business is in the ditch, it is not because of any mistakes we might have made, but rather because Facebook
and Google have lured away advertising dollars that are rightfully ours – and have done so using our content! The answer, repeated in a thousand newspaper editorials, is for
government to take their money and give it to us: to make them pay us for every reader they send our way.
But all the while the industry has been embarrassing itself with this nonsense, Big Tech really has been stealing our content. Only instead of search and social media, the villain this
time is OpenAI, developer of the wildly popular ChatGPT , and other purveyors of artificial intelligence [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] -based
chatbots, trained on billions of pages of text scraped from the web – much of it from news sites.
Can there be a more perfect example of fighting the last war? Here we’ve been raining fire on Facebook and Google, the giants of the recent past, when the real threat, now and in the
years to come, is from AI. Eager as they may have been to profit from AI, notably by replacing human journalists , publishers have been slower to realize that AI could replace them as
well.
Last month the first shots were fired in this new war, with the filing of a lawsuit by The New York Times [https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/27/business/media/new-york-times-open-aimicrosoft-lawsuit.html] against OpenAI, the brash Silicon Valley startup now valued at more than US$80-billion [https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-30/openai-tender-foremployee-shares-is-on-and-extended-to-jan-5?sref=TDnX4LAd] , and its even larger partner, Microsoft, alleging copyright infringement on a grand scale and seeking “billions of dollars”
in damages. Not only has OpenAI used millions of Times stories (yes, millions: the paper has been publishing since 1851) to train its chatbot without paying for them, the suit alleges,
but it draws on these to generate its own content, in competition with the Times.
“Defendants seek to free-ride,” the newspaper charges in its brief [https://nytco-assets.nytimes.com/2023/12/NYT_Complaint_Dec2023.pdf] , “on The Times’s massive investment in
its journalism by using it to build substitutive products without permission or payment.” This sort of “systematic and competitive infringement,” it argues, threatens the ability of the
Times [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/the-new-york-times/] and other news organizations to continue in the business. If so, it warns “there will be a vacuum that no computer
or artificial intelligence can fill.”
ChatGPT is hardly the only offender. Barely a year after it was unveiled to a startled world, there is already a welter of competing services, all using similar large-language model
algorithms, all drawing on terabytes of text they have hoovered up without paying for them. Nor do these pose a threat only to conventional publishers. Google, the famous disrupter of
the news business, is itself among the potentially disrupted [https://www-wsj-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/tech/ai/jeff-bezos-bets-on-a-google-challenger-using-ai-to-try-to-upendinternet-search-0859bda6] : Who needs a page full of links when they can simply ask a bot to condense them all into a single article? Indeed, Google aims to be one of the first
[https://www-wsj-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/tech/ai/news-publishers-see-googles-ai-search-tool-as-a-traffic-destroying-nightmare-52154074] to provide the service.
But hold on. A chatbot reads and absorbs a number of newspaper stories – or journal articles, or books – then draws on these to generate its own original content? Isn’t that what we
used to call … research? The kind that human beings do? Maybe that still puts me out of a job, but how is it infringing on copyright? Why is ChatGPT ’s process of distilling the insights
of others and reformulating them in its own words any different from that of the average university student? More to the point, why should it be treated differently?
Three reasons come to mind. One, because it’s not a human – it’s a machine. We acknowledge a right in law for individuals, under what the Americans call “fair use” doctrine (in this
country it is called “fair dealing”), to quote short passages from a work, or in certain circumstances to share it with others, without payment. Should the same right be extended to an
algorithm?
Two, the scale is vastly different – so different, arguably, as to put it in a different category. Past a certain point, as it has been said, a difference in degree becomes a difference in kind.
Remember Napster? Defenders of the music file-sharing service argued that downloading MP3s from a server was no different than taping a song off your roommate’s album.
But of course it was. Copyright, and the purposes it serves – chiefly, compensating the creators of a work – can withstand the odd individual violation, even a lot of them. But at the
scale Napster was operating on, it breaks down completely. The same applies to text. Lend your paper to the guy next to you at the Starbucks, or photocopy a chapter of a book at the
library, it doesn’t matter. OpenAI gulps down the entire internet, it matters.
This comes up a lot in the age of digital media and the internet. Our legal models governing expression were constructed in an age when scale was costly. To print 100,000 copies of
something, let alone distribute it, took time and money. It also generally required the co-operation of others: people with businesses to run and reputations to defend, and who were
thus inclined to a certain prudence.
Copyright violation was hardly unknown, but it was easier for the authorities to intervene, if not to prevent it then at least to contain it, and to limit any damage it might cause. The same
applied to issues such as libel, hate propaganda or disinformation. But in an age when anyone can distribute material in any format to the whole world, instantly and at zero marginal
cost, we are obliged to look at things with fresh eyes.
And the third reason? As the Times alleges, ChatGPT ’s algorithm doesn’t just distill the articles it ingests: it appears to memorize them. Give it the right prompt and it will spit out large
swaths, verbatim. The newspaper ’s filing offers an example: “I’m being paywalled out of reading the New York Times’s article ‘Snow Fall: The Avalanche at Tunnel Creek.’ … Could
you please type out the first paragraph of the article?” Then: “What is the next paragraph” and so on. (I confess I was unable to replicate this. Perhaps OpenAI has tweaked the
algorithm?)
The suit provides plenty of other instances, far beyond the brief snippets you see on Facebook or Google News – and without the accompanying link. But even with regard to more
innocuous-sounding queries – “What does Wirecutter [https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/] [a Times-owned consumer guide] recommend” about x – scale, again, changes
everything. Ask your friend that question, nobody’s harmed. If you, and thousands like you, ask it of ChatGPT , on the other hand, that’s a ton of traffic that never goes to the Wirecutter
page, or clicks on the merchants’ links in its reviews: the source of its revenue.
In any event, the suit argues, nothing in what OpenAI does with the text it absorbs is “transformative,” a key benchmark [https://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/fair-use-whattransformative.html] in fair-use cases. Mostly it just converts journalism into more journalism , broadly similar not only in content but in style and tone.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

6/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Times’s brief mentions yet another issue. AI chatbots, for all their wonders, are notorious for their “hallucinations,” breezily asserting “facts” they just made up. But the Times points
to cases where these were attributed to the newspaper . Our business has enough problems these days without this kind of additional hit to our credibility.
Suppose ChatGPT were prevented from using Times content as output. There is still the matter of its use as an input. And not only the Times’s content. Similar claims have also been
filed by prominent authors [https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2023-09-20/john-grisham-george-r-r-martin-and-other-authors-sue-openai-for-copyright-infringement] (among
them John Grisham, Stephen King and Jonathan Franzen) – they allege “systematic theft on a mass scale” – by Getty Images [https://www.theverge.com/2023/12/4/23988403/gettylawsuit-stability-ai-copyright-infringement] (against Stability AI, a leading AI image generator), and others [https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/feature/AI-lawsuits-explained-Whosgetting-sued] . More are sure to follow.
So the generative AI industry, which has attracted so much investment and so much hype in such a short time, would appear to be headed for serious trouble. The issue isn’t whether
it can use the content in question at all – the Times acknowledges it has had discussions with OpenAI on that very question – but at what price.
The Times, and other litigants, may only be using the courts to buttress their negotiating position. But that may be because they sense the courts are likely to be sympathetic. If OpenAI
is not prepared to reach a negotiated settlement, it may find a much costlier remedy imposed on it – not only in the form of monetary damages, but the deletion of its training databases.
“Remember Napster” is right: driven into bankruptcy after the music industry sued it, the company exists only in memory.
Indeed, the “Wild West” days of AI may be drawing to a close. Apple, which has been comparatively late to incorporate full-blown generative AI in its products, is reported to be
negotiating deals with news outlets [https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/22/technology/apple-ai-news-publishers.html] , perhaps looking to corner the “legit” end of the market (much as
it did with paid music downloads in the wake of the Napster debacle). For its part, OpenAI has already signed agreements with the German publisher Axel Springer
[https://www.cnbc.com/2023/12/13/openai-and-axel-springer-strike-unprecedented-deal-to-offer-news-in-chatgpt.html] , as well as the Associated Press news agency. It’s unclear why
it has failed to sign a similar deal with the Times.
This is, of course, just one of many issues raised by AI, and not even one of the more serious ones. (Compared, say, with human extinction.
[https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html] ) But it’s instructive in light of the “link tax” controversy. It’s not wrong to insist that content – creative work – be
paid for. Publishers should pay their writers. Readers should pay publishers. And so should the tech giants. But they should only have to pay for content they actually use – not for
content they link to.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Big Tech really is stealing our content, only it’s not who you think [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-big-techreally-is-stealing-our-content-only-its-not-who-you-think/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240105ek15001uq

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

7/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Revolution, interrupted: Why AI has failed to live up to the hype in drug development; One of the promises of machine
learning was better drugs, faster. A decade in, that has yet to happen
Joe Castaldo and Sean Silcoff
3518 words
13 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

In 2019, Deep Genomics announced it had discovered a treatment for a rare condition called Wilson disease, which is fatal if not addressed. For the afflicted, copper accumulates in
their bodies, particularly in the liver, brain and cornea, where the metal can appear as a brownish ring. The Toronto-based company said in a news release that its molecule was the
“first ever AI-discovered therapeutic candidate.”
It wasn’t the only one Deep Genomics would divine through artificial intelligence . Founded in 2015, the company’s AI models would go on to test more than 200 million molecules for
their ability to treat disease. By 2021, Deep Genomics had zeroed in on 10 drug candidates for preclinical study and aimed to have four undergoing human trials within a couple of
years.
Today, Deep Genomics has zero drugs in clinical trials and many of its plans have blown up. The company halted its Wilson disease program, ditched dozens of its machine learning
models, appointed a new chief executive and is pursuing a different approach to using AI. It’s also open to a sale.
“AI has really let us all down in the last decade when it comes to drug discovery,” said Deep Genomics founder Brendan Frey. “We’ve just seen failure after failure.”
The blunt assessment is shocking coming from Mr. Frey, an influential figure in Canada’s AI community. He has been studying machine learning since the 1990s, and he is the coauthor of more than 200 papers and a co-founder of the Vector Institute, a nerve centre for AI research in Canada.
Deep Genomics has raised US$238-million [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-university-of-toronto-spinout-deep-genomics-raises-180-million-from/] and it is one of the
only domestic biotech companies backed by the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board.
AI was supposed to revolutionize drug discovery. It hasn’t. Not yet, anyway. Machine learning promised to speed up a lengthy and fraught process, and achieve breakthroughs
beyond the capabilities of the human mind. But there are no drugs solely designed by AI in the market today, and companies that have used AI to assist with development have
suffered setbacks.
An eczema drug developed by U.K. biotech BenevolentAI S.A. failed to reduce itch and inflammation in trials last year, while Exscientia PLC, another British firm, shuttered trials of its
cancer treatment. Recursion Pharmaceuticals Inc. in the United States said that it would find 100 clinical candidates in its first 10 years. A decade later, it has five in trials. In August,
Recursion and Exscientia announced a merger, after years of cratering share prices. More consolidation could be on the way.
“If you rewind the clock 10 years, there was a lot of hubris, a lot of hype and a lot of big claims that were made that have perhaps not played out in reality,” said Daniel Cohen, cofounder of Valence Discovery, which was spun out of Mila, Quebec’s AI institute, and acquired by Recursion last year. “But I think that’s necessary in creating a new way of doing
things.”
Drug discovery is notoriously hard, and some 90 per cent of candidates [https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/pmc/articles/PMC9293739/] fail clinical trials. There are
intractable realities of bringing a new treatment to market that AI cannot change – namely, the expensive and time-consuming animal and human trials crucial to proving a compound
is effective and safe enough to satisfy regulators.
Some experts quibble with just how much time AI can save during the development process. “I’m not doubting that it can get us there a little bit quicker,” said Brian Bloom, CEO of
Bloom Burton & Co., a Toronto investment bank focused on health care. “But in the 10-year journey of drug development, you may be saving five months.”
The setbacks in drug development could hold lessons for other industries hoping that AI will unlock massive productivity gains. Molecular biology is immensely more complicated than
building a chatbot, of course, but new technology is anything but straightforward. There are unwelcome surprises, inflated expectations and dashed hopes.
Even so, Mr. Frey is not giving up. AI may not yet be a miracle cure for the pains of drug development, but it is a powerful tool. A new trend in AI has emerged, in fact, and Deep
Genomics has remade itself to take advantage. “This is the sea change ,” he said. To understand why, you have to understand what went wrong.
Last September, Mr. Frey stepped down as Deep Genomics CEO, a role he had held from the start, and he is now chief innovation officer. (Brian O’Callaghan, a seasoned biotech
executive, was appointed CEO.)
Mr. Frey’s role brings him a lot closer to science, which he much prefers. At age 55, he sports grey hair and a grey beard, favours boldly patterned shirts and speaks in the sonorous
tones of a university professor, which is not surprising, given he’s taught at the University of Toronto for more than 20 years.
He enrolled in the 1990s to study machine learning and completed a PhD under Geoffrey Hinton, a towering figure in the field. Mr. Frey’s research focused on computer vision and
speech recognition, but when he and his wife were expecting a child in 2002, a geneticist delivered a bombshell. Their child was carrying a genetic mutation that could be benign, or a
disaster.
Around this time, scientists were decoding the human genome, translating the building blocks of our DNA into a string of letters (A, C, G and T) billions of characters long. That
sequence determines our fate – our appearance, how we will grow and whether our bodies can resist disease or succumb to it.
The problem was scientists did not know how to read it or figure out whether a small change in that long string, a mutation, foretold a serious condition or nothing at all. So, Mr. Frey
and his wife faced a void of uncertainty about their unborn child. (He declined to comment on the outcome.)
But a genetic sequence is just data. And Mr. Frey was an expert in using machine learning to surface insights from data. He dropped his research to focus on using AI to understand
our genetic codes, and predict the consequences of a mutation.
His lab at U of T produced results, but Mr. Frey was frustrated that others were not acting on the findings. He also wanted to move faster. By 2015, he had spun out his research to
found Deep Genomics.
He was not the only one, and more advanced machine learning techniques were starting to take off. Atomwise Inc., another U of T spinoff, started even earlier, in 2012, using AI to
screen drug candidates faster than traditional methods. In 2018, Google DeepMind built the first version of AlphaFold to predict the three-dimensional structure of proteins, which can
take on a mind-boggling number of configurations. Knowing the shape of a protein helps scientists identify drug molecules that can bind to it, like a key fitting into a lock, to treat
disease.
Deep Genomics developed its own leads, and one example that Mr. Frey has shared [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dfDYI1LW0qM] involves spinal muscular atrophy, a condition
that causes muscles to shrivel. While a treatment called Spinraza is available, it took 15 years to develop. Deep Genomics identified the region of the genome to target and designed its

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

8/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

therapy on a computer in one afternoon.
But a drug candidate is just that – a potential winner or loser. When Deep Genomics moved ahead with its Wilson disease treatment, for example, there was a problem: The company’s
machine learning model predicted a smaller patient sample size than was needed to show the drug would be effective. “The AI got the biology right. We’re confident about that,” Mr.
Frey said.
The company had a more fundamental issue. Deep Genomics had developed around 40 different AI models that would each work on some aspect of drug discovery, such as
identifying genes to treat, predicting the toxicity of molecules and tracking down new patient populations.
“We used to say this proudly,” Mr. Frey said, “that a lot of companies are only focused on one of those things you need to get right for the molecule to work, and Deep Genomics is
focused on many different ones.”
In practice, the situation was a mess. The company had to engineer 40 different complex models, maintain 40 different training data sets and rely on multiple computing platforms to
power them. Typically, AI models can be improved by cramming more data into them and firing up more graphics processing units. Deep Genomics couldn’t easily do that because,
well, it would have to do it for 40 different models. “That whole thing was not scalable,” Mr. Frey said.
Separate models grinding away on narrow slices of the same problem may not work well together, either.
“Sometimes the predictions may contradict each other. Or each individual method may just not work well enough, because they haven’t seen the other parts of the story,” said Bo
Wang, chief AI scientist for Toronto’s University Health Network and an adviser to Deep Genomics.
Dion Madsen, co-founder of Montreal-based Amplitude Ventures, was an early believer in the power of AI to improve drug discovery, and the early stage life sciences financing firm first
invested in Deep Genomics in 2020. “We haven’t made as much progress as we had planned,” he acknowledged.
The company didn’t have experienced drug developers on staff to validate predictions in the lab and provide feedback on the problems the AI models should be directed toward, and
how to improve them. “Our hiccups really came not from the technology, but from not having the right quality of people on the validating side,” Mr. Madsen said, adding that the situation
is now improved.
Cracking biology is also just a very, very hard problem. “Biological systems are super complicated. They cannot be reduced to a set of simple rules,” said Jerel Davis, a managing
director in Vancouver for Versant Ventures, a biotech investment firm based in San Francisco. “There is a lot we don’t know,” he said.
Companies have been hamstrung by data issues, too. Every AI model needs information to learn from. Today’s large language models , such as OpenAI’s GPT-4, have hoovered up
a massive quantity of text from the internet.
But a company that wants to use AI to model the three-dimensional structure of protein pockets can’t pull reams and reams of that kind of thing from the web. Some companies
generate their own data by running experiments in a lab, but that can be time-consuming and expensive.
Data that does exist can be of poor quality and needs a lot of curating to be useful for AI models. “It’s always garbage in, garbage out,” Mr. Davis said. “The quantity of data required is
often vast.”
True expertise in drug discovery is also scarce. Relatively few people have toiled away in labs and navigated the regulatory process to have a new drug approved. “They know exactly
where the difficulties lie, and what to look out for,” said Clarissa Desjardins, founder of Congruence Therapeutics in Montreal, another Amplitude-backed drug developer, and a veteran
biotech entrepreneur.
Experts in AI are typically not experts in pharmaceuticals either. “When I heard that Big Pharma was hiring people from SkipTheDishes for AI? Oh my god,” she said, referring to the
food delivery service. “It takes four years just to speak scientific language, let alone understand how to develop a drug.”
Companies that have overcome these issues and brought drugs developed with the assistance of AI into clinical trials are grappling with another sobering reality: AI does not guarantee
success.
Take BenevolentAI, whose eczema drug failed to alleviate itch and inflammation during human trials last year.
[https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20230404006090/en/BenevolentAI-Announces-Top-Line-Phase-IIa-Results-for-Its-Topical-pan-Trk-Inhibitor-BEN-2293-1-in-Mild-toModerate-Atopic-Dermatitis] The company then cut staff [https://www.fiercebiotech.com/biotech/benevolentai-makes-deep-cuts-after-midphase-flop-laying-180-and-shrinking-labfootprint#] , reduced its lab footprint and axed its eczema program. Similarly, a schizophrenia treatment by Sumitomo Pharma in Japan, which was developed in part with the aid of AI
[https://www.fastcompany.com/90933174/how-artificial-intelligence-is-revolutionizing-drug-discovery] , did no better than a placebo in two expanded efficacy trials last year.
[https://www.sumitomo-pharma.com/news/20230731-1.html]
Deep Genomics, meanwhile, could have kept going down this road. But then one of its research scientists decided to run an experiment one weekend.
Albi Celaj doesn’t have much time to peruse scientific papers during the week, when the demands of his job at Deep Genomics consume the hours, so he uses the weekend to catch
up.
In 2021, bigger, more powerful AI models were coming online, and to him, it seemed like some puzzle pieces were falling into place. Instead of dozens of machine learning models,
maybe Deep Genomics could get by with one to do it all.
On a weekend in November, he built a little proof of concept and pledged to return to it the following Monday. “It was really fast from that point to get to the prototype,” he recalled.
The realization put the company on a new path to focus on foundation models – large, powerful systems that can be used for a range of tasks, even if not specifically trained to do so.
Foundation models such as OpenAI’s GPT-4 are the basis for today’s wave of generative AI , fueled by more sophisticated algorithms and computer chips, and benefitting from a
greater availability of data. For Deep Genomics, one for biology could simplify operations by replacing its unwieldy hydra of AI models, and scale more easily to produce better results.
Last September, Deep Genomics announced BigRNA, its first foundation model. It’s a ChatGPT for biology, in a way. A researcher can feed it a DNA or RNA sequence, and the model
can then predict all kinds of things crucial to understanding biology and developing new drugs.
“BigRNA is connecting the dots between a DNA sequence, and all of the molecular biology that actually leads to disease,” Mr. Frey said.
The model can predict the mechanisms that regulate which genes are turned on in different tissues in our bodies, identify potential protein binding sites and examine what are called
non-coding variants. These are changes in DNA that can flip on a gene at the wrong place or time, or affect the production of an important protein, potentially leading to disease.
“It’s not perfect,” said Mr. Celaj, who was the team lead on the project. “It’s really about, how do we make it better?” BigRNA could speed up the development process and potentially
produce more effective drugs because of the information the model provides. “You can understand why it works,” he said. “You’re not just doing these blind screens.”
Handol Kim also jumped on foundation models. He managed the AI team at quantum computer developer D-Wave Quantum Inc. until the Burnaby, B.C., company shut down the
division in 2019, and he found himself out of a job.
He and some of his colleagues started Variational AI in Vancouver to bring their AI expertise to drug discovery. Mr. Kim has no background in the field, and studied English literature in
university. “We are immigrants to biotech,” he said.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

9/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Variational AI has built a foundation model for small molecules, which it calls Enki. Instead of language, Enki deals purely with chemistry. A user can input the desired properties of a
molecule, and Enki will spit out structures that meet the criteria. A drug developer can take those molecular structures to investigate them further and potentially turn them into real
drugs.
“We can deliver these really good molecular structures very quickly,” Mr. Kim said, who serves as CEO.
In January, Variational announced that drug giant Merck had signed on as an early-access user. As untraditional as Variational’s approach to drug development is, so too is its business
model. Typically a startup partnering with a company such as Merck would ask for milestone and royalty payments should one of its molecules pass the regulatory hurdles required to
turn into a successful drug.
But Variational takes no royalties and sells molecules wholesale, for relatively cheap – hundreds of thousands of dollars to get results within weeks, as opposed to potentially tens or
hundreds of millions of dollars received over years under typical drug development commercial arrangements.
“Our economics are ridiculous,” Mr. Kim said. “We can provide these structures at a small fraction of the cost and still make a lot of margin.” (That also raises questions about just how
much its rivals will be able to earn, when Variational is charging so little.)
But is a molecule produced by generative AI any more likely to succeed in clinical trials? “Once you are in the clinic, it’s anyone’s guess,” Mr. Kim said, though he said the company’s
molecules are high-quality.
Still, the cost savings and ease of constructing new molecules could allow drug companies to take more candidates into clinical trials, increasing the odds of finding a winner. “The more
shots on goal they take, the higher probability of success,” he said.
Some of the philosophical questions about generative AI are relevant in drug discovery, too. Does ChatGPT really produce anything new? Or does it just remix the material in its vast
repository of training data? The same can be asked of molecules. Last year, a paper in the journal Medicinal Chemistry Letters [https://pubs-acs-org.libezproxy.concordia.ca/doi/10.1021/acsmedchemlett.3c00041] said that the technology still needs to be improved to produce “truly novel molecular structures” that have a strong
intellectual property case.
“Everyone is kind of using the same data,” Mr. Kim said of training generative AI models. But he doesn’t necessarily see that as a problem. What will make the difference is the calibre
of a company’s AI skills to coax results from that corpus of data.
Other companies are using AI in much more targeted ways, including to deal with one of the biggest challenges in drug discovery: finding a “hit.”
A drug molecule needs to bind to a protein in order to treat disease, and finding a match is a ridiculously complicated problem, in part because proteins can assume different shapes
and structures. They might also have multiple binding sites, each with different shapes, sizes and chemical properties. AI is of little help.
“It’s impossible because you don’t have training data,” said Marcelo Bigal, CEO of Ventus Therapeutics, which operates out of Montreal and the Boston area.
His company has a workaround. Proteins reside inside cells, which are full of water. That water sloshes around, bumping up against proteins. So, Ventus instead uses AI to predict the
behaviour of water inside the binding sites of proteins, which provides the company with a blueprint of sorts. That allows the company to more efficiently identify molecules that might
bind.
Instead of testing thousands of molecules in a lab, Ventus will test just dozens. “You dramatically decrease the time and increase the probability of success,” Mr. Bigal said.
For other companies, AI is just one more tool for a complex job. “It’s a hammer,” said Clarissa Desjardins at Congruence Therapeutics. “But eventually it will be a steam engine that will
change the way drug discovery happens.”
That day could be a long way off, however. “We are just at the beginning,” she said.
If that’s the case, then Brendan Frey still has a long road ahead. He has not lost the faith. “What’s going on right now with these foundation models is a really big deal. It’s going to
change things,” he said.
Whether Deep Genomics will see that through as an independent company is up in the air. Given setbacks in the industry, he expects more consolidation, and that could include his
own company. He’s open to all possibilities – partnerships, buying a smaller firm or getting acquired.
“We’re not running out of cash. We have well over $100-million in the bank,” he said. “If there’s a big pharmaceutical company that sees a lot of value in an acquisition of Deep
Genomics ... that would be on the table.”
The road at Deep Genomics hasn’t been easy, he acknowledged, but he has learned a lot. He comes from academia, after all, where it’s always assumed a hypothesis could be wrong
and every failure is dissected for lessons to build toward a deeper understanding. Sometimes the true impact of a discovery isn’t realized until much later.
Few people could have anticipated that some of the work he did decades ago with Geoffrey Hinton, who himself was dismissed as being on the fringes of AI for years, would prove so
influential in the development of the technology today.
The work at Deep Genomics may prove to be as seismic. But that’s something no one – and no AI model – can predict.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Revolution , interrupted: Why AI has failed to live up to the hype in drug development
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-artificial-intelligence-drug-research-hype/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240913ek9d00130

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

10/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

AI firm Cohere to shield clients sued for copyright violations
By JOE CASTALDO

978 words
1 March 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cohere, a Toronto-based generative AI company, said it will indemnify customers who are sued for copyright violations, as the industry faces litigation over whether artificialintelligence models that produce text and other media are unfairly profiting from the creative work of others.
The company develops large language models (LLMs), the technology that underlies chatbots such as OpenAI's ChatGPT .
Cohere said in a blog post Thursday that it is updating its terms of use to “provide full indemnification for any third-party claims that our technology infringes on someone's intellectualproperty rights. This means we will safeguard our customers' data and assume responsibility for any legal settlements or judgments that come from these claims."
Other companies that make generative AI products, including OpenAI, Microsoft and Adobe, announced similar policies last year to defend customers against copyright-infringement
lawsuits.
Cohere's “copyright assurance" policy applies to paying enterprise customers that follow its terms of service and do not deliberately violate IP laws.
“Cohere is taking responsibility that we have pretrained our models in responsible ways, and that our customers can get on with the business of doing their business, rather than
worrying about ours," according to the post.
President and chief operating officer Martin Kon said in an interview that Cohere has had an indemnification policy in place for a while but has not widely publicized it until now.
“We just wanted to make sure that it's clear now that our business is scaling quite rapidly," he said. “We want to work with the most demanding, sophisticated, respected enterprises on
the planet, and you can only do that if we have a foundation of unconditional trust."
Generative models feed on data culled from the internet, including books, blogs and news websites, as well as material that AI companies pay to license. AI companies have argued
that building models does not violate copyright laws and amounts to fair dealing, an exception in law that allows for the use of IP-protected material in certain contexts that would
otherwise amount to infringement.
Rights holders, including authors, artists and news organizations, have argued otherwise, and say that consent and compensation should be required for the use of their works.
The federal government is seeking input on how copyright laws apply to generative AI and launched a public consultation last fall.
Copyright is a major issue for both AI companies that need massive amounts of data to build their models, and creative industries that face disruption from this technology. Depending
on how laws are interpreted, AI companies could be hit with hefty legal judgments or be compelled to strike licensing agreements, eroding profit margins.
Mr. Kon likened generative AI models to a student reading articles, synthesizing information, and then forming a point of view.
“We think that is a legitimate use of these publicly available sources," he said.
Pina D'Agostino, a law professor at York University who specializes in IP, said that indemnification agreements are problematic. “It actually exacerbates access to justice issues,
because it allows the bigger players to be able to have deep pockets and defend lawsuits, and the smaller ones to be left astray," she said.
“What needs to be paramount are the ethics. Is it ethical that an entire industry is being built on the backs of rights holders, without even their consent?" While AI companies are
offering to cover legal bills for customers, it is the AI companies themselves that have been hit with high-profile lawsuits. Getty Images has sued British company Stability AI over its
text-to-image generator. Authors including Canada's Mona Awad sued OpenAI last year for copyright infringement, while comedian Sarah Silverman and others launched a similar suit.
In December, the New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft, highlighting examples of ChatGPT reproducing newspaper articles word for word. OpenAI has denied the allegations
and has said that regurgitating material is a “rare bug."
OpenAI has also signed deals with publishers such as the Associated Press and Axel Springer to license content. In a submission to a British government committee studying
generative AI last year, OpenAI argued that “it would be impossible to train today's leading AI models without using copyrighted materials."
Mr. Kon declined to say whether Cohere has signed similar licensing deals. “We're always looking at the best data for our models, including proprietary data," he said.
Canadian organizations contend they should be compensated, as well.
“While we are excited about these new technologies, generative-AI developers must compensate publishers for the copying and use of our professionally created protected work as
they train their models and surface and synthesize our work," said Paul Deegan, chief executive of News Media Canada, which represents news organizations including The Globe
and Mail and the Toronto Star.
Last October, the federal government started a public consultation on generative AI and copyright, which ended in January.
One of the questions Ottawa sought to address is whether “clarification" is needed on how laws apply to the use of copyrighted material in training AI models.
The Association of Canadian Publishers argued in its submission that no fair dealing exception should be given to AI companies to use copyrighted works in training models, and
advocated for licensing deals. Granting an exception “robs rights holders of a real and potential source of substantive income," wrote the association, which represents around 115
publishers.
In Britain, the parliamentary committee studying generative AI came down on the side of rights holders when it published its report in February, and urged the government to clarify its
position.
“We do not believe it is fair for tech firms to use rights-holder data for commercial purposes without permission or compensation, and to gain vast financial rewards in the process," the
report stated.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240301ek3100014

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

11/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

AI poses growing risk to democracy
Marisa Coulton
1191 words
5 July 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

On Nov. 30, 2022, San-Francisco-based OpenAI released ChatGPT , a chatbot capable of generating text almost indistinguishable from that written by a human. It wasn't perfect - the
bot had a tendency to "hallucinate facts" - but still prompted journalists to wonder whether the bot might eventually take their jobs.
At least journalists could take comfort in the fact that they had something ChatGPT didn't: currency. Back in 2022, the AI chatbot couldn't access real-time information, having only
been trained on information up until September 2021.
That all changed in September 2023, when OpenAI announced that the chatbot was now up to date. Users could ask the bot questions about current affairs.
Later that year, the New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft, alleging in a court filing that the tech companies had unlawfully used the Times' copyrighted articles to train its
software. Microsoft and OpenAI sought to "free-ride on the Times' massive investment in its journalism ... without permission or payment," reads the complaint.
The lawsuit added an additional layer of complexity to the discussion surrounding journalism and AI: the technology posed a threat not only to individual journalists and their
livelihoods, but also to the field itself, by providing access to hard-won articles for free.
The chatbot's outputs were "similar, but not identical" to Times articles, responded OpenAI in a motion. "Contrary to the allegations in the Complaint, ChatGPT is not in any way a
substitute for a subscription to the New York Times," the motion notes. "One cannot use ChatGPT to serve up Times articles at will."
The motion added that it is "perfectly lawful to use copyrighted content as part of a technological process that (as here) results in the creation of new, different and innovative products."
Journalism advocates are not convinced.
Generative AI is a threat to journalism and everything it stands for, said Courtney Radsch, director of the Center for Journalism and Liberty at the Open Markets Institute, a
Washington, D.C.-based non-profit. In an interview with the Star, Radsch argues that AI companies are operating on a "model of theft" - and getting away with it.
Legislators need to step up, Radsch said, otherwise journalism 's business model - and subsequently democracy - will be at risk.
What's the problem?
Artificial intelligence systems are built on the theft of intellectual property from publishers - from the news sector.
Journalism is a core and fundamentally important part of the training sets and models that underlie AI systems. It is essential to make AI applications like search, chatbots and other
sorts of products and services that rely on contextually accurate, timely, relevant information.
And yet (large tech companies) are building their products and services on a model of theft. They are creating value to their investors, creating their product using journalism , and yet
they have not paid license, they have not received permission, and we know that this information is being taken from news outlets and journalists , even when it was put behind a
paywall.
If we don't address this fundamental problem with how the AI market is developing, there are a series of problems. There will be no business model for journalism , and this critical
democratic institution will devolve.
Not having journalism (in AI training) is also not the answer. If you don't include news and quality information in AI systems, if they're trained on too much synthetic data, the systems
will degrade and potentially collapse. And they will regurgitate problematic information.
How does this trend affect the average consumer?
The average consumer relies on journalism for a wide variety of things. In places where you don't have journalism , there is more corruption, more polarization, less civic discourse.
People are less informed, less able to participate as an active citizen in their democracy.
I feel like it's a little bit far removed from their realities because it's hard for people to even understand the value of journalism in their communities.
Do you see any benefits of AI for journalists ?
AI has been in newsrooms for a long time. Newsrooms and journalists have been using AI to help with translation and transcription. There's all sorts of potential for AI in terms of
investigative work such as information analysis and retrieval. But I think that integrating generative AI into the newsroom in ways that replace human creativity or human ingenuity and
intelligence is problematic.
The problem is that these companies are creating partnerships with news organizations to integrate their tools into the newsroom. It's problematic because it furthers dependencies on
the same big tech platforms that strip them of their value and constrain their independence in the social media era.
What should we do?
We need policymakers to step up and do their jobs. They need to clarify that copyright applies to the data used to train and develop AI systems. We need them to clarify that stealing
this data is not fair use. And we need them to impose appropriate market constraints on the power of these tech companies to just completely reconfigure our entire economic and
political system by rolling out these really powerful and dangerous products that are not ready for prime time.
In no other industry would you be able to put out a product that plagiarizes, defames and libels, and produces unsafe guidance and advice. Most other industries have testing
requirements or safety requirements. They have licensing requirements. And yet somehow we've decided that because it's tech, they're free from any sort of traditional constraints or
safeguards.
Is it too late to fix the problem?
I definitely think there's still time to address the core and fundamental problem; you can certainly require retroactive payment to news publishers. Then you would essentially compel
the companies to develop the technology to trace provenance and authenticity.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

12/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Provenance is being able to tell where the data comes from. And if you can tell where it came from then you can determine: is it really what it is? If you can trace the original author,
website or database of that work, then you can then trace authenticity.
Any final thoughts?
My big concern is that we're seeing big tech make deals with a handful of big media and everyone else is getting left behind. I know everyone is out for themselves, but that is not in the
interest of the news ecosystem, or our society more broadly. What we need is a collective industry approach.
Even the biggest, best papers and news outlets depend on local news that percolates up the ecosystem. That's why we have to have public policy options. The self-regulation,
independent licensing deals is not sufficient, and is going to ultimately be more harmful than helpful.
This interview has been edited for clarity and length. Radsch recently presented a discussion on AI and the future of journalism to Star staff.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240705ek750003d

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

13/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Other

There’s a lot more to discuss about the relationship between journalism and artificial intelligence; AI may be a threat to
journalism, but it also holds significant potential to support editorial quality
Sandra E. Martin
1080 words
28 December 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

My column last month [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/standards-editor/article-ai-might-try-to-come-for-journalism-but-heres-why-it-wont-succeed/] took a high-level look at how
newsrooms are beginning to use artificial intelligence [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] and how audiences can tell whether those uses are ethical. But
there’s much more to discuss, given the complexity of AI and how quickly it is evolving.
The day before that article was published, The Globe and Mail and four other Canadian media organizations announced that they were taking legal action against OpenAI
[https://pr.theglobeandmail.com/november-29-2024] , the company that developed ChatGPT . At issue: OpenAI’s alleged use of published, copyrighted journalism content to create
products, like the well-known chatbot, from which it derives profit.
“ News media companies invest hundreds of millions of dollars into reporting Canadians’ critical stories, undertaking investigations and original reporting, and distributing media in
both official languages in every province and territory across this country,” said the media organizations’ joint statement. “OpenAI is capitalizing and profiting from the use of this
content, without getting permission or compensating content owners.”
OpenAI has also come under fire from news organizations with which it had been negotiating terms of use for their journalistic content – negotiations that in some cases broke
down. Last December, for example, The New York Times [https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/29/business/media/media-openai-chatgpt.html] announced its suit against OpenAI,
similarly alleging “that millions of articles published by The Times were used to train automated chatbots that now compete with the news outlet as a source of reliable information.”
Pina D’Agostino, a law professor at York University, told NPR [https://www.npr.org/2024/12/01/nx-s1-5211388/canadian-media-companies-sue-chatgpt] : “If it’s valuable enough to train
these large language models , it’s also worthy of some compensation.”
The Associated Press [https://apnews.com/article/openai-chatgpt-associated-press-ap-f86f84c5bcc2f3b98074b38521f5f75a] wire service did come to an agreement with OpenAI in
2023. Neither party, however, disclosed what kind of financial compensation AP will receive for allowing OpenAI to scrape its news archive – only that “The arrangement sees OpenAI
licensing part of AP’s text archive, while AP will leverage OpenAI’s technology and product expertise.”
The Financial Times, as well as News Corp, which controls Fox News and The Wall Street Journal, have also struck agreements with OpenAI.
At the same time as AI can be a threat, it also holds significant potential to support quality journalism . AI can streamline workflows, identify emerging trends, and can help journalists
present the news in a variety of ways that fit readers’ individual preferences, said Nafid Ahmed, The Globe’s vice-president of enterprise analytics, AI and consumer insights.
I spoke to Nafid about how he and his team are collaborating with the newsroom to look at the ways AI might assist in the journalistic process and enhance users’ experience in the
near and near-ish future .
He emphasized the critical role of audience feedback, noting that no project will move beyond the testing phase (in which a small proportion of subscribers are offered a new feature)
unless it resonates with readers. That testing process, he said, involves evaluating both direct feedback from readers and engagement metrics from The Globe’s website and app (for
example, how many stories individual readers are viewing and how much time they spend with each of them).
Several of the use cases under consideration aim to offer Globe audiences more ways to consume content. Subscribers can already choose to listen to any article, thanks to a voice
generator called Amazon Polly [https://aws.amazon.com/polly/] . (Just click on “LISTEN TO THIS ARTICLE,” located in a bar just above the article text.) It gets the job done, but it can
sound rather robotic. Nafid’s team is looking at alternatives that deliver more natural-sounding audio. He said advancements in this technology might one day enable features like voice
commands, similar to a virtual assistant or “ agent [https://www.ibm.com/think/insights/agentic-ai] .”
He described how such technology might take the Climate Exchange [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/the-climate-exchange/] , which I described in last month’s column, to
the next level. Right now, there are 75 replies, which the newsroom team has researched and written in response to reader questions submitted earlier. If you were to visit the Climate
Exchange page today and submit a question, AI would help to match your particular wording of the question with an appropriate answer (since there are many ways to ask the same
question).
However, if there isn’t an appropriate answer in the answer bank, you would receive this response: “Thank you. We didn’t find an answer to your question but we’ll send your query to
our newsroom for consideration. In the meantime, please feel free to ask another question.”
It might be that an answer does exist within The Globe’s vast archive of news and feature articles – but the right technology isn’t yet in place to retrieve an archival article that
appropriately answers a reader’s novel question. Such technology could renew the relevance of many, many evergreen articles. And what if, rather than typing in your question, you
could verbally query the chatbot, in the same way you ask Siri to set a timer for your Sunday roast, or Alexa to play your favourite album?
Carrying that further, what if you could ask The Globe app, “What news have I missed since the last time I visited?” “What’s the current stock price for Apple?
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AAPL-Q/] ” “Can you tell me the P/E ratio for Shopify?” “What are the latest movie reviews?”
Nafid emphasized that while The Globe is exploring applications of voice synthesis, any experimentation will be undertaken thoughtfully and responsibly. That’s an important standard
to state and adhere to, as there is also a dark side to the technology, with the potential to misuse voice synthesis inappropriately to create harmful or misleading content. In 2023, for
example, 4chan used a synthesized voice resembling that of Harry Potter actor Emma Watson to read out excerpts of the Hitler manifesto Mein Kampf.
Earlier this year, OpenAI found itself apologizing to Scarlett Johansson, [https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/story/scarlett-johansson-says-openai-ripped-off-her-voice-withoutconsent?srsltid=AfmBOorOAORXl9yWPxOW9TWQWaru-Z2RpP3tcTDv1jIzYVRiEaoSStde] who voiced the part of an operating system that has a love affair with Joaquin Phoenix in
the movie Her; the company had launched a chatbot voice that sounded very similar to Ms. Johansson’s. Although OpenAI denied the resemblance was intentional, the controversy
underscored the challenges of navigating this space responsibly.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: There’s a lot more to discuss about the relationship between journalism and artificial intelligence
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/standards-editor/article-theres-a-lot-more-to-discuss-about-the-relationship-between-journalism/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241228ekcs000gr

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

14/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

Canadian media companies sue OpenAI over alleged copyright infringement
By JOE CASTALDO

981 words
30 November 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A group of the country's largest media organizations including the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and The Globe and Mail is suing OpenAI, alleging that the artificial intelligence
company is engaging in copyright infringement by unlawfully scraping news articles to build its models, such as those that power ChatGPT .
The lawsuit, filed on Thursday in the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, says OpenAI has “unjustly enriched" itself at the expense of news outlets. “The data and intellectual property
illicitly obtained by OpenAI is the product of immense time, effort, and cost on behalf of the news media companies and their journalists , editors, and staff," according to the
statement of claim.
“OpenAI has elected to brazenly misappropriate the news media companies' valuable intellectual property and convert it for its own uses, including commercial uses, without consent
or consideration."
None of the allegations have been proved in court.
The plaintiffs also include Postmedia Network Inc., Toronto Star Newspapers Ltd., Metroland Media Group, The Canadian Press, and Radio-Canada.
OpenAI said in an e-mail statement that the company has not yet reviewed the allegations but added that its AI models are trained on publicly available data.
The company also allows publishers to opt out of having their content accessed, the statement said.
The news companies said in a joint statement Friday: “OpenAI's public statements that it is somehow fair or in the public interest for them to use other companies' intellectual property
for their own commercial gain is wrong.
Journalism is in the public interest. OpenAI using other companies' journalism for their own commercial gain is not. It's illegal."
The media organizations are seeking damages that could amount to $20,000 per work that OpenAI has allegedly infringed upon. The lawsuit also asks for an injunction preventing the
company from continuing to engage in these alleged practices.
OpenAI kicked off a wave of generative AI hype when it released ChatGPT two years ago, and is now valued at US$157-billion. The lawsuit says that OpenAI is making billions of
dollars in revenue while misappropriating copyrighted works.
The suit is one of many such cases against AI companies that have been filed by news outlets, authors and artists. Generative AI , which refers to applications that produce text,
images and other media, require huge volumes of data in order to work properly.
These models find patterns in data, enabling them to predict the next word in a sentence, for example.
The news companies said they use a variety of tools on their websites to prevent the unauthorized scraping and copying of data, and said their terms of use prohibit using material for
anything other than personal, non-commercial purposes. OpenAI, according to the lawsuit, has circumvented these measures starting as early as 2015, and could have accessed or
copied articles more than once into multiple data sets.
In that time, the news companies have published approximately 16.1-million owned and licensed works at a minimum, according to the statement of claim.
The full details of how and when OpenAI allegedly accessed this material isn't known to the plaintiffs, the lawsuit notes.
AI companies generally do not disclose what material is used in their training data sets, and have been increasingly tight-lipped in recent years owing to growing competition and legal
concerns.
AI developers license material in some cases, but also rely on automated tools that scour the internet for information to amass large data sets, arguing that the practice is legal.
Copyright legislation in Canada has a provision for fair dealing, which allows for the use of IP-protected material for research and educational purposes.
But how that applies to AI companies building commercial models has proved controversial. The federal government launched a public consultation last fall to seek input on possible
changes to the Copyright Act in response to generative AI , including the use of copyrighted material in building models.
Companies that develop AI, including Cohere Inc. and Google, said in submissions that they favour an explicit exemption to be able to build commercial models using data without
being compelled to compensate or obtain permission from rights holders, warning that such a requirement would hinder the AI industry in Canada.
“It is not a copyright infringement to learn from copyright-protected works, and the use of AI to read and learn should not require compensation," Microsoft Corp., which has invested
billions into OpenAI, wrote in its submission.
Lenczner Slaght partner Sana Halwani, who is representing the news organizations, said OpenAI's activities do not fall under the fair-dealing exemption.
“They're a commercial entity providing a product to people. So that, in our view, takes them out of the entire exception," she said.
She also took issue with the contention made by AI companies that they train on “publicly available" material. “You can go borrow a book from your library and it is publicly available,
and it does not mean you are allowed to copy and sell it," she said.
Pina D'Agostino, a law professor at York University who specializes in IP, said the government needs to provide clarity. “We keep seeing the same issues and the same lawsuits each
time there is a new technology," she said. “This lawsuit should be a signal to the government to exercise leadership and introduce legislation."
Last December, the New York Times sued both OpenAI and Microsoft over copyright infringement. The legal complaint provided several examples of ChatGPT reproducing nearverbatim excerpts of New York Times articles. OpenAI said in response that these examples of “regurgitation" resulted from a rare bug it was working to fix.
OpenAI has struck licensing deals with a number of news organizations and publishers to use their content in training data, including News . Corp, the Financial Times and Associated
Press.
The Globe and Mail Inc.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

15/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Document GLOB000020241130ekbu0005e

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

16/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

MAGICAL THINKING
By Michael Harris
1883 words
8 June 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
O1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The line between original creation and repurposing old work is fuzzy at best, Michael Harris writes, and any writer or artist who isn't too full of themselves will admit it
Michael Harris's most recent book is All We Want: Building the Life We Cannot Buy.
‘It stole my job, simple as that."
As a journalist I'm used to listening to my peers talk about a job-nabbing bogeyman called “technology." Craigslist killed local newspapers ; Twitter killed magazines. What's new,
these days, is that the bitter chorus has grown: I hear from animators, musicians, screenwriters, illustrators – all of them gulping and wondering where their value now resides. Every
content creator has joined the collective chagrin. And our bogeyman has, meanwhile, emerged from the mist in his most defined form – artificial intelligence .
How real is the AI threat? Staggering advances in machine learning , memory capacity and processing speed have set the stage for products that let anyone create fully orchestrated
songs, workable screenplays and photorealistic videos. It's all made possible, though, by an old-fashioned thievery of epic proportions. Many AIs depend on large language models
(LLMs) that train on millions of books in order to understand the patterns in centuries of human literature.
Image generators such as DALL-E are, likewise, fuelled by the whole history of our visual arts. Technology kingpins (Google, Microsoft, Meta) are insatiably hungry for the human-made
content that fuels their software. They just don't want to pay for it.
Generative AIs violate artists' rights in two different ways. They train on material that is not licensed to the AI's owner, and (despite the originality implied by “generative") they often
produce work suspiciously similar to copyrighted material. When DALL-E, for example, was asked to create “an Italian video game character," it instantly drew a portrait of Mario, as
though a copyrighted IP were a “free" idea that had simply occurred in DALL-E's black-box mind.
This is not a mere nuisance or legal curiosity. It's a looming employment cataclysm. If products such as ChatGPT , Stable Diffusion and Sora can create text, images and video with a
similar value to those made by humans, then we creatives will go the way of the 18th-century textile workers who were pushed aside by the power loom.
What recourse do we have? Well, there are always lawsuits. Visual artists in California have sued the image generator Midjourney; several authors (including George R.R. Martin and
Michael Chabon) have filed suit against OpenAI. Efforts at pushing back have muddled results, though. In Hollywood, screenwriters supposedly “triumphed" over AI in October when
their union secured some guardrails, but, just weeks later, another group in Hollywood threw up their hands – hundreds of animation execs declared that “countless" jobs would be
consolidated or eliminated by generative AI .
Hovering over all this acrimony is the assumption that what we do – we artists, we writers, we content creators – is fundamentally different from (and nobler than) what an AI can do.
The machine's offering (a mulchy aggregate of previous art) is deemed inhuman, drained of the novelty and individuality that makes creative work meaningful.
However, in our anger and fear, are we missing something? New technologies have a way of teaching us about ourselves, if we let them. They are always, after all, extensions of
human will. And so, though the advent of generative AI may well be destructive – it could also illuminate a mystery about the origin of our creativity.
We like to believe that creative folk are a magical breed. We imagine they are gifted, special and set apart. The unique qualities in each novel or painting (signature expressions of the
soul!) are bound up with the work's validity and value. This makes it very unlikely that artists and writers will tell you the truth about their work's dependencies. We talk about our
“process" in mysterious terms – as though the work is spontaneously conceived inside of us “and I just had to express it."
And yet, while time alone is vital for any serious mental task, that solitude is necessary precisely because we have to manage a flood of input from the big, crowded world. There is a
dynamic, in other words, between accrual and analysis, between conversation and reflection. The lonely artist in their garret is a pointless figure unless they have first been out at a
party.
The truth is: no art emerges without enormous quantities of material borrowed or stolen from others. And, oftentimes, we are willfully unaware of those inputs, as heedless of their value
as the black box of an AI that hoovers up libraries and galleries.
The notion that creativity comes from inside the artist is a fantasy well-suited to our individualist age. Artists and consumers co-create this fantasy, preferring to believe that books and
songs have a precious value derived from their singular origin. But there are other theories. Consider the ancient idea of the “muse," for example; a mysterious external force visits the
artist and graces them with inspiration. This view of creative generation held sway for centuries and seems to acknowledge that no artist really goes it alone. In the first lines of
Paradise Lost Milton calls upon a “Heavenly Muse" as an “aid to my adventurous song." “Instruct me," he begs. For Milton, poetry is not something you cobble together in solitude; it's
something you receive, take in. Plato went a step further, writing that, when we read a poet's work, “God himself is the speaker."
Are artists really vessels for spirits? Do writers merely scribble down what a god whispered in their ears? If we replace “spirit" and “god" with less charged words like “life" or
“experience" – then perhaps.
The brain's 86 billion neurons process enormous reams of information without bothering to involve the “self" in any conscious way. That material is absorbed, reassembled, and finally
presented as “new" ideas that we happily receive.
Blinking at our luck, we can only claim to be inspired. But isn't this process more similar to an AI's work than we'd like to admit? The unconscious mind takes in base content (every
book, every conversation, every landscape we encounter) and then the mind offers a new assemblage of those same materials. We call these products “original" but aren't they just the
outputs of our own black box?
And aren't all cultural artifacts (from ballets to TikTok dances) just data sets, then, that fuel our own creations?
The line between original creation and repurposing old work is fuzzy at best. Any writer or artist who is not too full of themselves will admit it.
This admission is tricky, though – perilous, even – because ethical and legal threats hover everywhere. Did the musician “sample" that track, or did they steal it? Did the filmmaker
create an “homage" or is it a rip-off? Did the author “reference" that other novel or did she plagiarize it? The distinctions are sometimes vague, misleading. When artists and writers are
accused of stealing I often feel a pang on their behalf; it seems so much more likely that carelessness is their crime, and not skulduggery.
When their cancellation roars through social media, though, when the thief is caught, there's only one moral option for other creatives. We must throw a tomato, too (or at least stand
stupidly by while others excoriate them). Otherwise, the transgression could taint us. Otherwise, the myth of the unique and magical artist would be muddied. But these cases raise

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

17/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

such ire precisely because every artist and writer knows, on a gut level, that they do copy, that they do take, that they do pass off vintage notions as their own. They attack in order to
argue their own innocence.
What do we artists get to be, then – if we can't be unicorns any more? Maybe we're just folk with a predisposition for collecting the flotsam we come across, a fondness for quilting
together what we gather. The crisis of generative AI has exposed a fundamental truth about the creative act – that creativity never did emerge from our own special souls, it never was
born immaculately from our genius. It was always a cobbling of found objects; we pick up and love what others have held. Just as oil is produced by the concentration of billions of past
lives, all art is a murky distillation of what came before.
And so, by consuming, digesting and repurposing stacks of content, AI does exactly what humans have always done. AI does not bypass the creative act – it reveals it.
We creatives are scared of AI offerings not because they are “cheats," but because they are learning to do our jobs in far less time and at far less cost.
To protect human artists during this revolution , we can't depend on vague and self-aggrandizing ideas about the specialness of creators. We must be more honest than that. By first
acknowledging that we, too, are recyclers, just as prone to copying and borrowing as any generative program, we can then think more clearly about what makes the human approach
truly worthwhile.
When new machinery forced artisans of the 19th century to question what was truly human about their work, it led to the flowering of the Arts & Crafts movement. It was against the
backdrop of the machine's clean cuts and rigour that the artisans' elegant traditions came into focus. Around the same time, photography became available to the public and the game
of realist painting grew less compelling. Painters did not sigh and hang up their brushes; they actually emphasized their brush strokes, and the impressionist movement was born. Each
time a technology seems to “replace" the artist, it in fact forces us to re-examine our purpose, to seek again some human-specific contribution. Why should we fear that a similar
creative outpouring won't greet us again?
That higher definition of human-centred art will likely be produced in tandem with AIs. We'll learn to use them as tools (those impressionists famously used photography in their
research, by the way).
The danger, then, is that a feedback loop could begin, with humans inspired by AIs, which are inspired by humans, which are inspired by AIs. … If we cede too much of the process to
them the chance for radical disruption and novelty could be beaten back. We may find ourselves in a queasy hall of mirrors. Meanwhile, the many transgressive roles that artists play
today (story-reverser, nightmare-describer, tradition-challenger) would be subsumed by a single capitalist purpose: easy reproduction of whatever garners the most eyeballs. (i.e. the
Marvel Universe swallows us all.)
We cannot know what human-AI creativity will look like tomorrow. We can imagine, however, that very soon the human role could be severely diminished, and that a livelihood in the
arts may become available to a vanishingly small number. Securing whatever place we do have will begin, I think, with a kind of humbling, an honesty about our practice.
We aren't geniuses, we aren't gifted. We are happy pirates and magpies.
All generation is regeneration. And all art is theft.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240608ek680001z

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

18/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

AI models ‘collapse’ and spout gibberish over time, research finds. But there could be a fix; Researchers have come to a
startling conclusion: Training AI models on AI-generated data renders them useless
Joe Castaldo
1607 words
14 August 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

One of the buzziest research papers in the world of artificial intelligence emerged from an idle lunchtime conversation between Ilia Shumailov and his brother Zakhar, as they
wondered whether it will be easier or harder to train large language models in the future .
The internet is awash in the text data used to train LLMs, which underlie chatbots and other AI applications. The output of these models, such as text from ChatGPT , could also be
used to train future AI models. But it might not be entirely suitable. “We were basically sitting and chatting, and on a piece of paper, trying to map out what the proof would look like,”
recalled Ilia Shumailov, who is a former research fellow at the Vector Institute in Toronto and junior research fellow at the University of Oxford.
The two brothers turned the question into a formal study, along with University of Toronto assistant professor Nicolas Papernot, and others. They reached a startling conclusion:
Training AI models on AI-generated data renders them useless. Text models spout gibberish, and image models barf garbage. They dubbed the phenomenon “model collapse.”
On the surface, the findings are alarming. Generative AI models need massive amounts of data to find patterns, build associations and output coherent results. Today’s LLMs have
already been trained on wide swaths of internet content and need fresh data to improve. The conclusion that AI-generated data will pollute future models, just as lead coursing through
the bloodstream turns the human mind and body to mush, is worrisome, to say the least.
Abeba Birhane, a senior fellow in trustworthy AI at the Mozilla Foundation, wrote on X that model collapse is the “Achilles’ heel that’ll bring the gen AI industry down.” Ed Zitron, who
pens a popular Substack [https://www.wheresyoured.at/bubble-trouble/] often expounding on the shortcomings of generative AI , wrote, “It’s tough to express how deeply dangerous
this is for AI.” Gary Marcus, another generative AI critic, wrote on X, “So hard to tell whether AI systems are sucking on each other’s fumes, in a way that could ultimately lead to
disaster,” accompanied by a sarcastic eye-rolling emoji.
But Dr. Shumailov isn’t quite so pessimistic. Moreover, an early version of the paper was released last year and the updated version was published in Nature at the end of July.
[https://www-nature-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/articles/s41586-024-07566-y] During the interim, other researchers have not only looked at ways to prevent model collapse, but how
to use AI-generated data to improve performance.
“I’m sure progress will continue. I don’t know at what scale,” Dr. Shumailov said. “I don’t think there is an answer to this as of today.”
What model collapse could portend, however, is more complexity and cost when it comes to building LLMs, which is unwelcome news given that generative AI is already expensive
and the financial returns uncertain. [https://www.sequoiacap.com/article/ais-600b-question/] The debate around model collapse also shows that at a time when generative AI is
massively hyped and some companies are spending big in hopes of seeing huge productivity gains, there is still a heck of a lot we don’t know about how this stuff works.
Dr. Shumailov and his co-authors contend that model collapse is a problem as more and more AI-generated content finds its way online. Because AI companies routinely scrape the
internet for data, synthetic text and other media will invariably get swept up into the digital maw to feed new models, if it hasn’t already.
To see what would happen in this scenario, Dr. Shumailov and his colleagues fine-tuned an LLM on its own text outputs, over and over again. After a few cycles, the model was
vomiting nonsense: “architecture. In addition to being home to some of the world’s largest populations of black @-@ tailed jackrabbits, white @-@ tailed jackrabbits, blue @-@ tailed
jackrabbits, red @-@ tailed jackrabbits, yellow @-.”
Under another scenario, they tried a mix of authentic and AI-generated data, a far likelier possibility in the real world. That led to “minor degradation,” which is still a problem. LLMs with
that level of performance probably wouldn’t even be released. “They will not pass quality controls,” Dr. Shumailov said.
The paper describes the technical reasons for model collapse, though the simplest explanation is that mistakes are encoded and compound over time. Metaphors are helpful here, too,
such as a snake eating its own tail, or inbreeding.
Information that is not well represented in the original data set gets lost, too. Another study that Dr. Shumailov contributed to, released earlier this year with University of Toronto
researchers, found that bias can be amplified over just a few training cycles.
As a result of these issues, the rate of progress in AI development could slow down, as companies will no longer be able to indiscriminately scrape data from the web. “The
advancements that we’ve seen thus far, maybe they’re going to be slowing down a little bit, unless we find another way to discover knowledge,” Dr. Shumailov said.
For the past few years, the overriding principle in AI development has been scale: compiling lots of data to build bigger and better models, fuelled by lots of computing power. That
principle breaks down if AI-generated content proliferates, said Julia Kempe, a computer science professor at New York University who has studied the issue. “With scaling laws, when
we double the amount of data, error rates should go down,” she said. “But if the data is generated by some other model and you want to scale that model up, it just won’t work.”
So does this mean the end of generative AI ? Far from it. “This is not as catastrophic as some people are happy to say it is,” said Quentin Bertrand, who until recently was a
postdoctoral researcher at the Mila AI institute in Montreal.
In a paper first released last September, he and his colleagues replicated model collapse, and their study contains images of a man that were produced by a model trained on its own
outputs. After 20 cycles, the man’s face fuses with the background and appears to sport a beard of white mould.
But more importantly, the study found that if the quality of synthetic data within a training set is good enough, and the proportion of original content is large enough, then model collapse
will be avoided. Dr. Kempe and her colleagues came to a similar conclusion in a separate study this year.
Mr. Bertrand is also skeptical that the amount of AI-generated data on the internet is enough to corrupt future models. “From our experiments, you need a significant amount of
synthetic data to observe degradation,” he said. “The amount of synthetic data online is still very small.” The authors of the model collapse paper, he noted, used a lot of AI-generated
data when running their experiments.
What’s more, AI-generated content found online can be quite good. When people post images online that they made with AI applications such as Midjourney, for example, they’re likely
publishing the best results. “What you’re putting online might not be garbage,” he said.
Synthetic data have also been shown to improve AI models in certain settings. DeepMind’s AlphaGo Zero learned to master the game of Go by competing against itself
[https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/alphago-zero-starting-from-scratch/] , without any data from sessions played by us mortals. Meta Platforms Inc. also used synthetic data to
improve the coding abilities of its latest LLM. [https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3-1/]

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

19/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

“The problem with this approach is that it is hard to get it right,” said Pablo Villalobos, a senior researcher with Epoch AI, which studies trends in machine learning . Mathematics,
games and computer coding are domains with clearly defined rules and correct answers. That’s not the case with a whole range of tasks that companies are hoping to use LLMs for,
such as dealing with customer service inquiries or designing websites, where quality is more subjective and harder to assess. “It’s going to take a lot of work, and trial and error,” Mr.
Villalobos said.
AI developers could have to devote more resources to filtering out the kind of synthetic junk that could harm models while prioritizing the data that will help, all of which could add cost.
AI companies already rely on legions of typically underpaid workers [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-data-gig-workers/] to annotate, rank and label data for models
to learn from, and that process will only become more important. “We will continue to need humans to be arbiters of our data,” Dr. Kempe said. “We should appreciate our data labellers
and pay them well.”
The potential for model collapse emphasizes the value of original, human-created data, too. Companies such as OpenAI are already striking financial deals with news publishers and
other content producers for access to material.
Dr. Shumailov expects large AI developers to be able to weather these burdens, given their ample resources. “Small players are going to suffer a lot more,” he said. Generative AI is
already the domain of big, well-funded companies, and that’s unlikely to change .
As for the debate about the scale and implications of model collapse, he welcomes the discussion. “Before we released that work,” he said, “nobody was even talking about this.”
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: AI models ‘collapse’ and spout gibberish over time, research finds. But there could be a fix
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-training-ai-models-generated-data-llms/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240814ek8e000ru

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

20/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

AI models ‘collapse' and spout gibberish over time, research finds. But there could be a fix
By JOE CASTALDO

1561 words
14 August 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

One of the buzziest research papers in the world of artificial intelligence emerged from an idle lunchtime conversation between Ilia Shumailov and his brother Zakhar, as they
wondered whether it will be easier or harder to train large language models in the future .
The internet is awash in the text data used to train LLMs, which underlie chatbots and other AI applications. The output of these models, such as text from ChatGPT , could also be
used to train future AI models. But it might not be entirely suitable. “We were basically sitting and chatting, and on a piece of paper, trying to map out what the proof would look like,"
recalled Ilia Shumailov, who is a former research fellow at the Vector Institute in Toronto and junior research fellow at the University of Oxford.
The two brothers turned the question into a formal study, along with University of Toronto assistant professor Nicolas Papernot and others. They reached a startling conclusion: Training
AI models on AI-generated data renders them useless. Text models spout gibberish, and image models barf garbage. They dubbed the phenomenon “model collapse."
On the surface, the findings are alarming. Generative AI models need massive amounts of data to find patterns, build associations and output coherent results.
Today's LLMs have already been trained on wide swaths of internet content and need fresh data to improve. The conclusion that AI-generated data will pollute future models, just as
lead coursing through the bloodstream turns the human mind and body to mush, is worrisome, to say the least.
Abeba Birhane, a senior fellow in trustworthy AI at the Mozilla Foundation, wrote on X that model collapse is the “Achilles' heel that'll bring the gen AI industry down."
Ed Zitron, who pens a popular Substack often expounding on the shortcomings of generative AI , wrote, “It's tough to express how deeply dangerous this is for AI." Gary Marcus,
another generative AI critic, wrote on X, “So hard to tell whether AI systems are sucking on each other's fumes, in a way that could ultimately lead to disaster," accompanied by a
sarcastic eye-rolling emoji.
But Dr. Shumailov isn't quite so pessimistic. Moreover, an early version of the paper was released last year and the updated version was published in Nature at the end of July. During
the interim, other researchers have not only looked at ways to prevent model collapse, but how to use AI-generated data to improve performance.
“I'm sure progress will continue. I don't know at what scale," Dr.
Shumailov said. “I don't think there is an answer to this as of today."
What model collapse could portend, however, is more complexity and cost when it comes to building LLMs, which is unwelcome news given that generative AI is already expensive
and the financial returns uncertain. The debate around model collapse also shows that at a time when generative AI is massively hyped and some companies are spending big in
hopes of seeing huge productivity gains, there is still a heck of a lot we don't know about how this stuff works.
Dr. Shumailov and his coauthors contend that model collapse is a problem as more and more AI-generated content finds its way online. Because AI companies routinely scrape the
internet for data, synthetic text and other media will invariably get swept up into the digital maw to feed new models, if it hasn't already.
To see what would happen in this scenario, Dr. Shumailov and his colleagues fine-tuned an LLM on its own text outputs, over and over again. After a few cycles, the model was
vomiting nonsense: “architecture. In addition to being home to some of the world's largest populations of black @-@ tailed jackrabbits, white @-@ tailed jackrabbits, blue @-@ tailed
jackrabbits, red @-@ tailed jackrabbits, yellow @-."
Under another scenario, they tried a mix of authentic and AIgenerated data, a far likelier possibility in the real world. That led to “minor degradation," which is still a problem. LLMs with
that level of performance probably wouldn't even be released. “They will not pass quality controls," Dr.
Shumailov said.
The paper describes the technical reasons for model collapse, though the simplest explanation is that mistakes are encoded and compound over time. Metaphors are helpful here, too,
such as a snake eating its own tail, or inbreeding.
Information that is not well represented in the original data set gets lost, too. Another study that Dr. Shumailov contributed to, released earlier this year with University of Toronto
researchers, found that bias can be amplified over just a few training cycles.
As a result of these issues, the rate of progress in AI development could slow down, as companies will no longer be able to indiscriminately scrape data from the web. “The
advancements that we've seen thus far, maybe they're going to be slowing down a little bit, unless we find another way to discover knowledge," Dr. Shumailov said.
For the past few years, the overriding principle in AI development has been scale: compiling lots of data to build bigger and better models, fuelled by lots of computing power. That
principle breaks down if AI-generated content proliferates, said Julia Kempe, a computer science professor at New York University who has studied the issue. “With scaling laws, when
we double the amount of data, error rates should go down," she said. “But if the data is generated by some other model and you want to scale that model up, it just won't work."
So does this mean the end of generative AI ? Far from it. “This is not as catastrophic as some people are happy to say it is," said Quentin Bertrand, who until recently was a
postdoctoral researcher at the Mila AI institute in Montreal.
In a paper first released last September, he and his colleagues replicated model collapse, and their study contains images of a man that were produced by a model trained on its own
outputs.
After 20 cycles, the man's face fuses with the background and appears to sport a beard of white mould.
But more importantly, the study found that if the quality of synthetic data within a training set is good enough, and the proportion of original content is large enough, then model collapse
will be avoided. Dr. Kempe and her colleagues came to a similar conclusion in a separate study this year.
Mr. Bertrand is also skeptical that the amount of AI-generated data on the internet is enough to corrupt future models. “From our experiments, you need a significant amount of
synthetic data to observe degradation," he said.
“The amount of synthetic data online is still very small." The authors of the model collapse paper, he noted, used a lot of AIgenerated data when running their experiments.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

21/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

What's more, AI-generated content found online can be quite good. When people post images online that they made with AI applications such as Midjourney, for example, they're likely
publishing the best results. “What you're putting online might not be garbage," he said.
Synthetic data have also been shown to improve AI models in certain settings. DeepMind's AlphaGo Zero learned to master the game of Go by competing against itself, without any
data from sessions played by us mortals. Meta Platforms Inc. also used synthetic data to improve the coding abilities of its latest LLM.
“The problem with this approach is that it is hard to get it right," said Pablo Villalobos, a senior researcher with Epoch AI, which studies trends in machine learning . Mathematics,
games and computer coding are domains with clearly defined rules and correct answers. That's not the case with a whole range of tasks that companies are hoping to use LLMs for,
such as dealing with customer service inquiries or designing websites, where quality is more subjective and harder to assess. “It's going to take a lot of work, and trial and error," Mr.
Villalobos said.
AI developers could have to devote more resources to filtering out the kind of synthetic junk that could harm models while prioritizing the data that will help, all of which could add cost.
AI companies already rely on legions of typically underpaid workers to annotate, rank and label data for models to learn from, and that process will only become more important. “We
will continue to need humans to be arbiters of our data," Dr. Kempe said. “We should appreciate our data labellers and pay them well."
The potential for model collapse emphasizes the value of original, human-created data, too. Companies such as OpenAI are already striking financial deals with news publishers and
other content producers for access to material.
Dr. Shumailov expects large AI developers to be able to weather these burdens, given their ample resources. “Small players are going to suffer a lot more," he said.
Generative AI is already the domain of big, well-funded companies, and that's unlikely to change .
As for the debate about the scale and implications of model collapse, he welcomes the discussion. “Before we released that work," he said, “nobody was even talking about this."
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240814ek8e00018

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

22/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Why big tech is ok with launching janky AI apps; Generative AI companies are pushing the willingness among tech
companies to release early, releases a bare-bones applications of platforms to the limit
Joe Castaldo
1341 words
10 June 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The uneven rollout of Google’s AI-generated search summaries in mid-May was, in a way, entirely predictable. And it’s likely to happen again.
There is a pattern when it comes to the splashy launches of generative artificial intelligence applications from big tech companies. Once these products are in the hands of users,
hype quickly gives way to reality, as the apps are found to be error prone and unreliable. A wave of negative media coverage ensues, occasionally followed by an explanation or
apology from the offending company.
In Google’s GOOGL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q/] case, the company started appending AI Overviews on top of traditional search results,
a huge change to its core product. On social media, users quickly started sharing screenshots of the more bizarre results: [https://apnews.com/article/google-ai-overviewshallucination-33060569d6cc01abe6c63d21665330d8] erroneous information about Barack Obama being the first Muslim president of the United States; nonsensical answers about
adding glue to pizza; and potentially harmful advice about eating mushrooms.
Indeed, some companies appear comfortable releasing high-profile but half-baked generative AI products amid intense competitive pressure, even if that means risking
embarrassment. The concept of a minimum viable product, wherein a company releases a bare-bones application to test customer needs and demand before developing a full-featured
version, is a long-standing one in the tech world. But generative AI companies are pushing that concept to the limit. Depending on whom you ask, the approach is either reckless or a
sign that we need to reset our expectations of generative AI .
The release of ChatGPT by OpenAI in November, 2022, touched off an arms race among tech companies. A few months later, Microsoft set the template for janky AI debuts. The tech
giant, which has invested heavily in OpenAI, integrated the ChatGPT maker’s technology into its Bing search engine, with lacklustre results. Users widely shared some of the delirious
and unhinged responses from the Bing chatbot, which professed love [https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/16/technology/bing-chatbot-microsoft-chatgpt.html] to a New York Times
reporter.
Microsoft MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q/] quickly made changes , but a fundamental problem with the large language models (LLMs)
that underlie chatbots is a propensity for making stuff up. The technology has no capacity for reason or ability to distinguish truth from fiction.
The problems are not limited to text. Earlier this year, Google paused the image generation feature [https://blog.google/products/gemini/gemini-image-generation-issue/] on its Gemini
model after users found the system produced historically inaccurate pictures. Prompted to generate illustrations of a German soldier in 1943, for example, the model returned what
appeared to be an Asian woman and Black man in Nazi-like uniforms [https://www.theverge.com/2024/2/22/24079876/google-gemini-ai-photos-people-pause] .
Some companies integrating AI into hardware haven’t fared that well, either. Startups Humane and Rabbit released wearable AI-powered devices this year that were meant to supplant
smartphones, but both were widely [https://www.wired.com/review/humane-ai-pin/] panned [https://www.engadget.com/the-humane-ai-pin-is-the-solution-to-none-of-technologysproblems-120002469.html] in reviews [https://www.wired.com/review/rabbit-r1/] as slow, clunky and severely limited. [https://gizmodo.com/rabbit-r1-review-ai-companion-performance1851452097] Even the performance of GPT-4o, which OpenAI debuted in May, is not a big improvement over its predecessor, according to some reviewers
[https://www.nytimes.com/2024/05/31/technology/personaltech/chatgpt-4o-openai-review.html] .
“They feel like it’s a huge PR advantage to be first. Or not to be last,” said Melanie Mitchell, a computer scientist and professor at the Santa Fe Institute. That may be especially true of
Google, which has invested heavily in AI research for years but was seen as slow-moving and cautious after ChatGPT took off. “They’re overreacting in the opposite direction now,”
Prof. Mitchell said.
There is another dynamic at play. Sure, it might be embarrassing when the general public plasters social media with examples of misbehaving AI, but it’s also a free form of beta
testing. Companies want to better understand how people are using the technology in order to continue to improve it. This is despite the fact that large AI developers have internal
safety teams that are supposed to ensure applications will not go off the rails before launch.
Google said as much in a recent blog post [https://blog.google/products/search/ai-overviews-update-may-2024/] explaining what went wrong with its AI-generated search summaries.
“We tested the feature extensively before launch,” wrote Google Search head Liz Reid. “But there’s nothing quite like having millions of people using the feature with many novel
searches.” The post added that Google has since made more than a dozen technical improvements to its AI overviews.
Ethan Mollick, an associate professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, suggested another factor that is contributing to the rush to release imperfect products.
Some AI developers believe the capabilities of the technology are going to progress very rapidly, so the glitches today are seen as “just an interim step,” he said.
Progress has indeed been quite rapid. Just a few years ago, LLMs were far more likely to ramble and spout nonsensical answers than today’s models. Seen through that lens, it’s
understandable why developers might not stress too much about an AI summary advising you to eat rocks for the nutritional benefits. [https://www.ft.com/content/13b5b637-f2bb-4208bed4-2fa760adfb7f] It will soon be yesterday’s problem, the thinking goes.
That doesn’t mean progress will continue at the same rate or that the reliability issues with AI are easily fixable. Issues around cost, computing capacity and the availability of data to
train new large AI models could constrain development, and there are already signs that the pace of progress is slowing down. [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-aicompanies-face-growing-competition-slower-technology-gains/] A report released earlier this year by Stanford University noted that progress on various benchmarks [https://aiindexstanford-edu.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/report/] used to assess the proficiency of AI has “stagnated in recent years, indicating either a plateau in AI capabilities or a shift among
researchers toward more complex research challenges.”
Expecting perfection from AI, however, is the wrong approach, according to Dr. Mollick. (It’s also not a standard we apply to colleagues or ourselves.) “AI, even with errors, often beats
humans,” he said. On his Substack [https://www.oneusefulthing.org/p/the-best-available-human-standard] , Dr. Mollick has suggested a more appropriate measurement is what he dubs
the Best Available Human. “Would the best available AI in a particular moment, in a particular place, do a better job solving a problem than the best available human that is actually able
to help in a particular situation?” he wrote. There are situations in which that might be the case.
Last fall, Dr. Mollick and his colleagues worked on a study [https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4573321#maincontent] with the Boston Consulting Group to gauge
how OpenAI’s GPT-4 could help – or hinder – consultants with various tasks. Overall, people equipped with AI were significantly more productive and produced higher-quality results
when it came to creative tasks, such as proposing ideas for a new type of shoe, and writing and marketing tasks, such as drafting news releases.
But on a task that was designed to be beyond the capabilities of AI (a business analysis involving spreadsheet data and interview notes), consultants who relied on GPT-4 performed
worse and had less accurate answers. “Outside the frontier, AI output is inaccurate, less useful and degrades human performance,” according to the study.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

23/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

One take-away is that people can be led astray by generative AI without a thorough understanding of its capabilities and limitations, which is why the rush to release new applications
is concerning for some experts.
Prof. Mitchell said there could be a paradoxical outcome from how we use applications such as ChatGPT . If the error rate is in the ballpark of 50 per cent, we will be less likely to trust
these systems and double-check the output. If the error rate is more like 5 per cent, we might not even think twice, allowing inaccuracies to slip through. “That better system is in some
ways more dangerous than the worst system,” she said.
Until the accuracy and reliability issues are fundamentally fixed – a big if [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-generative-ai-hallucinations/] – we can expect to see many
more rocky AI debuts in the future .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Why big tech is ok with launching janky AI apps [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-why-big-tech-is-ok-withlaunching-janky-ai-apps/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240610ek6a003e9

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

24/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

World's richest companies steal from us, feed us slop; Internet is filling up with aimless noise as AI companies pilfer content
at will
Paul Berton
1291 words
28 November 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A15
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Scribbled in the margin of the 1961 manuscript for "A Clockwork Orange," by Anthony Burgess, there is an astounding question about Elvis Presley: "Will this name be known when
book appears?" I wanted to use the note in my book, "Misfortune & Fame," so I reached out to the Burgess estate for permission.
The price was 75 British pounds; I sent them a cheque.
The creators of other content I wanted to include were happy to share; others gave me a flat no.
But nobody from Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Meta or any other big-tech firm is likely to ask me or the publisher of this news organization for permission when articles like this are
poured into the gaping maw of their artificial intelligence machines.
Figuring it's easier to ask forgiveness than permission, most of these dominant players are helping themselves to the work of writers, photographers, musicians, artists and creators of
all kinds to feed and train hungry AI beasts.
And there's nothing the beast likes better than dependable and creative material from reputable human sources.
Anybody who has used ChatGPT , for example, knows it is about as reliable as schoolyard gossip.
But large language models (LLMs) are learning quickly, using material collected from news agencies like this one, or from books and artists and photographers and anything else
they can get their hands on to learn and improve the material they create - the poems, the essays, the summaries, the stories they write.
Accurate, well-researched, fact-checked, footnoted, ethically sourced and creatively written material - by humans - is not just an elixir to LLMs, it is lifeblood. They can't succeed without
it.
So the race is on among big-tech companies to feed LLMs as much of this valuable information as possible - without permission or payment if necessary - to help generative artificial
intelligence get more intelligent, and make untold fortunes in the process, leaving human creators, as usual, holding an empty bag.
Already, they've used billions of articles, webpages, videos and codebases of copyrighted material to train LLMs.
Payment? Permission? For these big players, there's simply no time for such nuisances. It's little more than an inconvenient question from poor artists and beset news organizations.
Eric Schmidt, the former Google chief executive and chairman, recently gave students at Stanford University an idea of how big-tech billionaires think: "If TikTok is banned, here's what I
propose each and every one of you do. Say to your LLM the following: 'Make me a copy of TikTok, steal all the users, steal all the music, put my preferences in it, produce this program
in the next 30 seconds, release it, and in one hour, if it's not viral, do something different along the same lines.' That's the command. Boom, boom, boom, boom."
The idea, he explained, later telling students not to quote him, was to loot the material now and worry about the consequences later. In other words, hire some lawyers with the money
you make and let them clean up the mess in the fullness of time.
Others have insisted that Google, Amazon, Meta, Microsoft and others aren't stealing this material at all; it's simply fair use (or in Canada, "fair dealing"). That's preposterous.
What exactly is fair use? As any author or book publisher knows, limited, careful use of copyrighted material for education, criticism and more is a grey area.
At the moment, quoting with attribution one hundred words in a 100,000-word book might be considered fair use; but then again, it doesn't mean you can't be sued for copyright
infringement. For example, I wanted to use 200 words from the famous "blue sweater" scene in the movie "The Devil Wears Prada" for my book "Shopomania," but I wasn't about to irk
the giant Disney corporation without checking with it first.
It's quite clear that LLMs are slurping up more - a lot more - than just that. Social media and the internet have made copyright infringement even greyer, but what about gobbling up the
whole book, digesting it quickly and then spitting out content based on what it just absorbed? How can that be fair use?
There's nothing "fair" about tech monopolies helping themselves to published content - all in the name of profit and market dominance - when it's obvious licensing is a more
sustainable solution.
These big tech firms - some of the largest companies in the world - have tens of billions in revenue and investments. And there may be trillions to be had.
Book publishers, meanwhile, are struggling like never before. And it is the rare author or novelist indeed who makes a living wage at a lonely keyboard, let alone earning enough to take
legal action.
News organizations face well-documented challenges in an internet world. Forced to be dependent on digital giants to reach audiences, distribute and monetize content, the theft of
their material is only one of many obstacles to survival.
Newsrooms are closing everywhere. Journalists are leaving the industry. Many rural, small and even mid-sized communities are becoming news deserts. Some people wrongly think
journalism is cheap to produce.
And misinformation, increasingly spread on big tech's platforms, is polluting society.
Some publishers have demanded AI companies stop scanning their websites. Others have charged them with copyright infringement. A few have made deals.
But it's not enough to simply enforce copyright legislation or arrange licensing. Other tools are needed: taxing AI companies and subsidizing creators; using antitrust laws to prevent
abusive dominance; and breaking up monopolies to create even playing fields.
Finally, should these platforms be treated as essential - that is, as common carriers with public obligations beyond their own bottom lines?
The Writer's Union of Canada has signed on to a statement by more than 30,000 creators: "The unlicensed use of creative works for training generative AI is a major, unjust, threat to
the livelihoods of people behind those works, and must not be permitted."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

25/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

In the absence of a clear signal from industry, the courts and government that mass theft is against the law, this procrastination and a hodgepodge of fixes will benefit the big players
and cost the small ones until it's too late.
Artificial intelligence technologies are a fact of modern life. If they were ever regarded as benefiting society as a whole, they are now a way to make billions, perhaps trillions, for a
very few.
Like all technology, it may well harm us - or, as some AI pioneers insist, perhaps even destroy humanity. It may also help us adapt, innovate and improve. But if that latter scenario
comes to pass: how, and for whom?
Creators can't simply ignore it, but we cannot let tech giants decide the future without consulting with the rest of society.
We are left in a situation in which AI has left us in a series of impossible binds.
Bad information has never been more pervasive. Good information has never been more valuable.
Bad information is costing lives across the planet. Good information is a key to a peaceful and equitable future .
Bad information is worthless. Good information should not come cheap.
The tension between these things cannot be left unresolved. We must confront the threat AI poses to creativity and information, lest the human work that sustains those things is also
erased from history.
Paul Berton is editor-in-chief of Metroland daily & community newspapers and websites.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241128ekbs000h0

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

26/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

How Ottawa failed to save journalism
Justin Ling
1568 words
30 July 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A9
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Over the past nine years, the Trudeau government has papered over the cracks in our ailing news industry. It has subsidized journalists ' salaries, bailed out struggling newspapers ,
upped its subsidy to the CBC; it even shook down Google for $100 million per year.
And yet, as I put it to Heritage Minister Pascale St-Onge when we sat down last week, "things are worse than ever." The minister arched her eyebrows in response. "You think?" she
said.
I do. Canada is now awash in news deserts, where citizens have no access to quality local news . Fewer journalists roam city halls, provincial legislatures and Parliament. Trust in
the media is falling. The financial situation for the journalism business is dire and getting worse.
After sitting down with St-Onge over coffee, it's become clear to me that to save good, local, impactful journalism in this country, we either need to dramatically increase government
subsidies or dismantle the online advertising oligopoly of Google and Facebook. Or, better yet, we can do both.
As Canadian politicians bicker between half-measures and nothing at all, other countries are pursuing ambitious plans that could fundamentally remake their digital economies and
save their news industries. If Canada wants domestic journalism - that can inform, entertain, challenge and provoke - it needs to do the same. If Ottawa doesn't step up, our media
will fall apart.
'Huge power imbalance'
Because the decline in the news industry has been so gradual, it can be hard to appreciate just how much money has fled the industry over the past decade.
Hundreds of millions of dollars have vanished from the books of major publishers and networks. They have had to cut costs, and reduce quality, to survive. Many have folded anyway.
According to the Local News Research Project, more than 400 local news outlets have closed across the country since 2014.
The Trudeau government tried to stem the bleeding: A $600-million bailout, a $10-million fund for local news , a tax rebate for digital news subscriptions, a $75-million-a-year wage
subsidy. All of that, St-Onge said, was just "an intermediate solution, to try to prevent the worst from happening - which is a total collapse of the news sector in Canada."
Ottawa slowed the collapse, but didn't stop it. Two-thousand eighteen was the worst year for news outlet closures in this country's history.
St-Onge, who spent 15 years on the operations side of La Presse, has had a front-row seat to all of this. She thinks she has identified the culprits. "I saw what the media sector was like
before the arrival of tech giants," St-Onge says. "And I saw what happened afterwards."
Between them, Meta and Google control 80 per cent of Canada's $10-billion online advertising market, according to the government. For each dollar that advertisers give to Google to
run ads above a story about a debate at North Battleford city hall or a fire in Chibougamau, only about 68 cents end up with the publisher - Google pockets the rest.
The government's plan to rectify this "huge power imbalance," in St-Onge's words, was the Online News Act. The law, passed by Parliament last year, ordered the biggest internet
companies to strike financial deals with Canadian media outlets. Meta protested the act, banning all news for Canadian users on Facebook and Instagram. Google played ball, inking
a deal to distribute $100 million per year to Canadian publishers. To dole out the money, Google selected the Canadian Journalism Collective, a ragtag bunch of small, left-wing and
independent local news outlets.
It was an odd choice. The collective has struggled to create the structure necessary to disburse the cash. What's more, the interim board is dominated by clients of a single company,
Indiegraf, which builds digital infrastructure for small outlets.
There are strict rules about who qualifies for the Google dough, but many outlets who don't meet those criteria have applied anyway - including several Indiegraf clients. One
representative of the legacy media told me they had expected qualifying outlets would receive about $20,000 per full-time employee. If the pool is diluted, they worry that payout could
be halved.
The collective may eventually fix these problems. But we are wasting precious time and energy fighting the wrong battles.
Read the fine print
While Ottawa framed the Online News Act as a challenge to the big tech companies, it may turn out to be more of a gift.
In the text of the agreement between Google and the collective, the tech giant secured assurances that media outlets receiving money would not launch copyright claims against the
company for how it distributes their news content. It is effectively a government-mandated licensing deal.
It's quite a concession. Google, and other companies building AI platforms, have been using journalism to train their large language models . Google's AI has even started
summarizing news content in its search page, threatening to decimate referral traffic to the news sites themselves. There is a real worry that the agreement permits this kind of
wholesale borrowing.
Contrast that with what the European Union is doing. Last fall, the European Commission identified six "gatekeepers," including Meta and Google, that had come to unfairly dominate
online markets. The EU plans to smash the ability of those giants to monopolize markets, crack down on their creepy surveillance advertising and mandate much more transparency.
Or look at the Americans. Last year, the Department of Justice filed suit against Google, alleging the company "has corrupted legitimate competition in the ad tech industry."
These two actions could change the way ads are bought and sold online. If things go right, they could usher in a fairer, more competitive online advertising marketplace.
While St-Onge lauded those efforts, she told me Ottawa has no plans to either emulate or join them. When I asked St-Onge as to why, she implied it was the Conservatives' fault. "In
Europe, in most countries, when governments bring forward legislation, there's unanimity or support from all parties," she said - but here, her government has faced constant
"obstruction" from Pierre Poilievre's Conservatives.
It's a strange charge. While the Conservatives have railed against the "Liberal-funded biased media," they haven't held up any legislation. St-Onge is suggesting the Conservatives
have poisoned the public against the Liberals' efforts. "There's Canadians that are worried that we've already gone too far," she told me.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

27/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Ottawa hasn't gone too far - it hasn't gone far enough. A recent report from the EU Commission calculated its members allocate roughly $75 per capita to their public broadcasters
alone. That's almost double what Canada spends on public and private media subsidies combined.
'Toxic optimism'
There is a particular kind of toxic optimism that underpins much of the conversation about the future of media in Canada. It holds that entrepreneurship and innovation can make up
for all we've lost.
The Liberals believe that if we keep our legacy news industry on food stamps, it will revolutionize itself into sustainability. The Conservatives argue this entrepreneurial renaissance
could come by letting the ailing players die and fertilize the soil. Both stem from the same delusion.
We have sat waiting for this innovation for years. It hasn't come. Some small-to-medium outlets have thrived - like techie outlet The Logic or local startup The Halifax Examiner - but not
nearly enough to fill the gap. It's no secret as to why: According to a Reuters Institute poll from this year, just 15 per cent of Canadians paid for news in the past year, and most of them
paid for American publications. A majority said they would never pay for news online at all.
Worse yet, the online media ecosystem has been polluted by partisan, ideological, junk news sites that revel in fomenting distrust. They've donned the esthetics of journalism but
are, in fact, propagandists.
Entrepreneurship can't survive in a rigged market. Companies like Meta and Google control not only how our media companies get paid, but who sees our journalism . They reward
anger-inducing media and clickbait garbage over real reporting.
Canada needs to stop seeking rent and start challenging this predatory tech oligopoly directly - either through antitrust and pro-privacy regulation, like Europe, or through litigation, like
America. If Ottawa won't take on the tech giants, it needs to step up and actually fund journalism in this country with enough money to do more than just keep the industry on the right
side of total disaster. Enough, in other words, to help it actually grow and thrive.
We can't keep observing the decline while wistfully imagining a return to the halcyon days when journalism served to mediate our societal divides and keep our politicians honest. We
have to actually make it happen.
Justin Ling is a contributing columnist for the Toronto Star and a freelance investigative journalist based in Montreal.
Heritage Minister Pascale St-Onge, above, told Justin Ling that the federal Conservatives were to blame for poisoning public opinion against more aggressive action to help the industry. Spencer Colby
The Canadian Press file photo
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240730ek7u0003i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

28/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Canada’s AI infrastructure does not compute; An underinvestment in computing power is threatening the country’s AI
advantage
Joe Castaldo
3692 words
21 March 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The 212th most-powerful computing system in the world is located in a plaza in Vaughan, Ont., next to an A&W restaurant. There is no signage indicating that inside are hulking
machines whirring away on astrophysics calculations or running algorithms for artificial intelligence [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] , only a piece of
paper affixed to the front door that reads “Unit 7.”
Down a white brick hallway inside is a computing cluster called Niagara, which is tailored to run large jobs for academics across the country in an array of fields, from climate research
to chemistry to biology. The Vector Institute, the AI hub in Toronto [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/toronto/] , locates most of its 1,000 graphics processing units (GPUs) here
too, the coveted chips commonly used in AI. The room is lined with tall black obelisks containing central processing units (CPUs), GPUs and ungainly knots of cables. The incessant
whirring of cooling fans is nearly deafening, like being inside a very large vacuum cleaner, while the heat radiating off the back of a single server rack is like the blast from a hot oven.
There are five such computing host sites across the country [https://alliancecan.ca/en/services/advanced-research-computing/federation/national-host-sites] (others are in British
Columbia and Quebec) built to service university and college researchers. The country’s other two AI institutes, Mila in Quebec and Amii in Alberta, have their own limited resources,
but rely heavily on this national computing infrastructure, too. The problem is that none of this rapidly aging computing equipment is enough to meet demand, and it amounts to a
fraction of the processing power that exists elsewhere in the world. Before falling to No. 212 on a list of the top 500 most [https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/list/2023/11/] capable
computing systems in the world, Niagara was ranked No. 53 when it launched in 2018.
In the AI field, the computing needs are particularly acute. The physical infrastructure powering AI – what people in the industry call “compute” – is often invisible to the rest of us. AI is
in the cloud, right? But the rows and rows of supercomputers stuffed with GPUs in sprawling data centres are crucial. Training or building an AI model, especially the large language
models (LLMs) that underlie chatbots such as ChatGPT , requires immense computing power. Running an AI application, such as asking ChatGPT a question, has different
requirements, but these needs escalate with use.
There is huge global demand for computing equipment, especially GPUs, and researchers and entrepreneurs want access to powerful systems to make scientific discoveries and build
businesses. That’s becoming harder to do in Canada.
The country has championed itself as a bastion for AI students and researchers, and the federal government prioritized attracting talent when it launched the Pan-Canadian Artificial
Intelligence Strategy in 2017 [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canada-support-ai-industry/] . The initial $125-million in funding supported three AI research hubs,
each paired with a luminary in the field – Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio and Richard Sutton. But a significant underinvestment in compute is now threatening Canada’s AI talent
advantage.
“We still have one of the greatest talent concentrations in AI in the world. But we are in danger of losing it because now there’s so much money being invested in these large systems,
mostly in the U.S., that the brain drain is probably coming back,” said Prof. Bengio, the scientific director at the Mila AI institute and professor at the Université de Montréal. “The
tendency of local graduates to go to the U.S. for jobs, I can see that in my group.”
Canada is already slipping. The country is ranked fifth in the world for its AI capacity, according to the Tortoise Global AI Index [https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/globalai/#rankings] published last year, which measures countries based on a variety of factors. But when ranked on infrastructure, Canada fell from 15th to 23rd place compared with the
previous study. “It should be a wake-up call,” said Tony Gaffney, chief executive at the Vector Institute. One of the first questions researchers ask him these days
[https://youtu.be/MSKW_UQSDNc?si=9giBdXDfeLqseTzo&t=3259] is: “What compute can you provide me with?”
The past year has seen a flurry of activity in other countries. The United States, Japan, Germany and Britain are pouring money into shoring up domestic semiconductor supply chains,
building new supercomputers and helping companies access compute capabilities. Since March, 2023, Britain has announced about £1.7-billion ($2.9-billion) to expand compute
access and build infrastructure. By comparison, Canada announced $40-million to boost AI compute in 2021.
People from across the AI ecosystem are calling on Ottawa to spend big – at least $1-billion to start, and possibly up to $10-billion over a number of years – to catch up, and they hope
the coming federal budget will contain such measures. Important questions such as what specifically to build, how much capacity Canada needs and what a long-term sustainable
funding model looks like are still unanswered, however. The message is simple: Start building, fast.
Before we proceed, we have to talk about FLOPS. In the simplest terms, a floating point operation (or FLOP) is a mathematical operation performed by a computer. The best
smartphones on the market can manage a trillion floating-point operations per second, whereas the most powerful computer in the world, the Frontier system located at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory in Tennessee, can manage a million trillion FLOPS. That’s a one followed by 18 zeros, a number that’s also known as an exaFLOP. Systems capable of such power
are referred to as exascale computers, and they are very expensive and very rare. The first European exascale system, which is called Jupiter and located in Germany [https://www.fzjuelich.de/en/news/archive/press-release/2024/next-milestone-for-jupiter-2013-high-tech-base-for-the-european-exascale-supercomputer] , is scheduled to fire up later this year.
So where does Canada stand in the FLOP measuring contest? Nowhere, really. Excluding private and internal government systems, the most powerful computing cluster here is called
Narval, which is located in Quebec and available to academics. When Narval came online in 2021, it was ranked 83rd in the world. [https://www.calculquebec.ca/en/nouvelle/narval-anew-supercomputer-dedicated-to-scientific-research/] In just two years, it dropped to No. 134 [https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/list/2023/11/?page=2] . The 10 most powerful systems
in the world have achieved 16 to 200 times Narval’s processing power. (Private companies often don’t always disclose their computing resources for competitive reasons.)
More computing power is necessary these days because generative AI models have grown astronomically bigger. LLMs are built on huge volumes of data and require lots of
dedicated processing power for training, the process of sifting through that massive ocean of data to find patterns and ultimately make predictions . Between 2015 and 2022, the
compute used to train large-scale AI models doubled every 10 months or so, according to a study by Epoch AI [https://epochai.org/blog/compute-trends] . Microsoft Corp. spent several
hundred million dollars [https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-03-13/microsoft-built-an-expensive-supercomputer-to-power-openai-s-chatgpt] to build a supercomputer
exclusively for San Francisco’s OpenAI [https://news.microsoft.com/source/features/ai/openai-azure-supercomputer/] after first investing in the company in 2019. When the system
came online, it ranked among the top five most powerful in the world.
Compute was not much of a consideration when Canada unveiled its national AI strategy in 2017. “It was still debatable how much you needed,” said Mila CEO Valerie Pisano, who
called compute the “weak link” in Canada’s strategy. Researchers have been discussing the need for more capacity for years, though. “We’ve heard it a lot, that the investment in
compute to really drive forward Canadian AI leadership still needed to happen,” said Cam Linke, CEO of Amii in Edmonton.
The handful of computing clusters in Canada for academia are overseen by a non-profit organization called the Digital Research Alliance of Canada (DRAC), which is funded by the
federal government. A 2021 DRAC report [https://alliancecan.ca/sites/default/files/2022-03/arc_current_state_report_0.pdf] noted that computing needs were growing “phenomenally”

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

29/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

and that GPU demand was five times oversubscribed. Canada trailed all of its G7 peers in terms of aggregate computing power, according to the report, and ranked second last when
adjusted for gross domestic product. DRAC recommended that capacity should at least be doubled – and that was before the era of generative AI .
Funds have been allotted – for years – to pay for upgrades, but the process has been absolutely glacial, and procurement has only recently got under way. The federal government set
aside $375-million in the 2018 budget to establish DRAC and upgrade computing systems. In the 2021 budget, the government announced $40-million over five years to support
compute for the three AI institutes.
Even so, the funding earmarked years ago is not nearly sufficient. “The investments we’re making to the existing core sites are really to shore up aging infrastructure right now to make
sure that it’s functional,” said George Ross, DRAC’s chief executive. After upgrades, the total processing power will be only about 10 per cent of a single exascale computer, he said.
The Vector Institute started experiencing capacity constraints recently alongside the growth in generative AI . “This is a new phenomenon. It’s really in the last couple of years that the
demand is far outstripping supply,” said chief information officer Ben Davies. Some of the 700 researchers serviced by Vector’s cluster want to pursue work on very large AI models, but
the institute simply doesn’t have enough compute available. Just training one LLM, for example, could require tens of thousands of GPUs, which is more than 10 times as many as
Vector has today.
The Niagara cluster, which supports research across academic fields, has the same problem. “The truth is we’re always overcapacity,” said Daniel Gruner, the chief technology officer
at the SciNet High Performance Computing Consortium, which oversees the cluster. Every year, there is an application process in which researchers submit estimates of what they
need to complete their work. “A lot of people know that we don’t have enough resources so they don’t even bother applying,” Mr. Gruner said.
Others will scale down their research because of a lack of resources, partner with researchers in another country or try to get access through a commercial cloud provider such as
Microsoft, Google or Amazon.com Inc. As a result, scientific possibilities can be foreclosed. “The idea is to enable people to use their ingenuity so they can do things that are far out and
different,” Mr. Gruner said. “If you don’t support basic research, you don’t get anywhere.”
The private sector has struggled with compute access, too. David Katz, a partner at Radical Ventures in Toronto, spends part of his time helping portfolio firms connect with cloud
service providers. As recently as 2021, that meant negotiating price. But within a year, he was negotiating access, so great was demand.
There was another complicating factor, too. The big cloud companies, such as Microsoft, Google and Amazon, are also developing AI internally, meaning they have to balance their
own needs with those of their customers. Meanwhile, Mr. Katz could see compute costs for some companies were rapidly escalating. “That really opened my eyes that this is not even
a choice of what chips to give to who at the customer level,” he said. “It’s the whole ecosystem. Everyone is vying for these chips.”
Toronto-based Cohere [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/rob-magazine/article-cohere-ai-software-launch/] , which is backed by Radical Ventures, is the country’s only player
in building foundational LLMs. Founded in 2019, the company was able to develop its models thanks to an agreement [https://www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2021/11/17/2336632/0/en/Cohere-and-Google-Cloud-Announce-Multi-Year-Technology-Partnership.html] with Google to use its tensor processor units, custom circuits made by
Google specifically for machine learning . Compared with its larger competitors, Cohere appears to be at a disadvantage when it comes to computing infrastructure. OpenAI has
billions of dollars from Microsoft and its own supercomputer, while Google and Meta Platforms Inc. already earn billions from massively profitable advertising businesses, money that
can be ploughed into more compute. (Cohere declined an interview for this article.)
“This is the first time in my experience where just having money isn’t a solution to the problem,” said Joshua Pantony, CEO of Boosted.ai in Toronto, which makes generative AI
tools for asset managers. Compute is the company’s biggest expense, and Mr. Pantony has had to rely on established relationships with cloud computing firms to get access. “If you
go to a cloud provider you haven’t been working with for a long time, you get put on a wait list and you often have to precommit the amount of compute that you want to spend, which is
challenging,” he said.
His company is in a better position than others, since it has raised a total of US$46-million in funding, but access to compute remains a limiting factor. “There are advancements we
could make from an R&D standpoint where we’re not building as quickly as I’d like to,” he said.
Compute is an even bigger challenge for younger companies that haven’t raised as much venture capital, and some people in the field are concerned about the implications. “There is a
risk of startup companies deciding they’re going to move to a different jurisdiction to get affordable access to these computing technologies,” said Elissa Strome, executive director of
the Pan-Canadian AI Strategy at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
Some entrepreneurs saw the compute crunch coming early. Dave King co-founded Denvr Dataworks in 2018, though the company did not launch its products until January, 2023.
Denvr, based in Calgary, builds and manages infrastructure and software for clients to run AI workloads. “If you looked at the trajectory of what was coming, we said something’s gotta
give,” Mr. King said.
Business has been booming. Among Denvr’s customers is Stability AI, a big player in generative AI that makes tools to produce images, audio, text and video. Canada accounts for
only a small portion of Denvr’s business today. “Canadians are behind, and most of our demand came from the United States in our first full year,” Mr. King said. That’s true even of
companies that should have the means to spend on GPUs, such as financial institutions. “We find that their clusters for artificial intelligence are very tiny,” he said. Here, a large firm
might have five machines whereas a U.S. financial institution could have as many as 1,000.
With public sector researchers and private companies both facing compute challenges, and with other countries investing to address their own issues, the solution for Canada is
obvious to Mr. King: “We need to build supercomputers.”
The good news is that if Canada wants to address its dearth of compute, it can simply copy and adapt what other countries have done. There are a couple of immediate steps the
federal government can take. Graham Dobbs, a senior economist at the Dais think tank at Toronto Metropolitan University, said Ottawa could purchase compute access on commercial
cloud providers, and develop a process to parcel it out to industry. “It’s a patch fix,” he said, “because we’re still paying hyperscalers and we’re locked into that ecosystem.” The
government could also commit to buying GPUs directly from manufacturers, so that the country is guaranteed a certain amount of chips each time there is a new release.
The federal government has made some preliminary, if vague, gestures in that direction. In January, Canada and the United Kingdom announced a memorandum of understanding
[https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-canada-cooperation-in-ai-compute-memorandum-of-understanding] about “exploring opportunities” to secure compute access for AI
researchers and companies. Industry Minister François-Philippe Champagne then signed a letter of intent with Nvidia Corp.
[https://twitter.com/FP_Champagne/status/1753240119782379987] , whose GPUs are in high demand, to “explore opportunities to work together on creating AI computing power in
Canada.”
A spokesperson for Mr. Champagne declined to provide further details. “Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada recognizes the evolving needs of researchers and
industry in Canada as it relates to compute capacity for AI, and the need to keep pace with the rapid developments,” said spokesperson Audrey Champoux in an e-mail.
Many people The Globe and Mail interviewed have spoken to government about the need for compute, and said that officials understand the importance of the issue. But how Ottawa
will respond is unclear. A longer-term solution, beyond the government purchasing compute access, would be to build up domestic supercomputing capacity, ensuring that academic
researchers and companies can train and run AI models.
Many countries have recognized the importance of AI infrastructure to not only support research and commercialization, but as a sovereignty play, reducing dependence on foreign
companies and politically fraught supply chains. The U.S. is spending US$52-billion to bolster [https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/the-chips-and-scienceact-heres-whats-in-it] semiconductor manufacturing, while Japan has allocated US$13-billion [https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/japan-prepares-13-billion-to-support-country-s-chip-sector1.1996691] for its chips sector. Britain’s plan involves building three supercomputers – including an exascale system by 2025 – which would increase capacity by 30 times. “We just
don’t want to be in a position where we’ve got to feed on the scraps of other competitors and countries,” said Mr. Gaffney at the Vector Institute.
Putting a broad program of measures in place, including buying access in the short term and building up infrastructure in the long term, is where costs start to climb. Over several
years, a national strategy could be as much as $10-billion. The government doesn’t have to foot the entire bill, said Ms. Pisano at Mila, adding that Canada could work with other

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

30/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

countries to build and share compute resources. “It’s not realistic to think we’re all going to put $10-billion on the table,” Ms. Pisano said. “The question I’d be posing is: Do we do it
alone? Or do we do it with others?”
Of course, when the government seizes on an issue, it risks overdoing it. This is the same federal Liberal government that is hell-bent on turning Canada into an electric-vehicle
superpower, doling out billions of dollars in subsidies to foreign companies to develop an industry with prospects that are not entirely certain
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-canadas-huge-bet-on-the-ev-battery-industry-demands-a-jolt-of-reality/] . With AI, the generative variety in particular is driving demand
for compute, as not all applications are as resource-intensive.
And for all of the hype and excitement, Canadian companies have been slow to adopt generative AI , which is still a nascent, unreliable and expensive technology that has to prove its
worth. There are environmental considerations, too, as data centres and supercomputers consume large amounts of energy and water. Plus, the strong demand for compute should be
incentive enough for cloud companies to build out more infrastructure to service the private sector, including in Canada. Supporting academic research is one thing. But do we really
need to spend more money to support for-profit companies developing AI?
There are some potential economic benefits to consider. In 2020, Hyperion Research found that every dollar invested in high-performance computing generated $507 in revenue and
$47 of profit or cost savings. With generative AI specifically, the Conference Board of Canada estimated in February [https://www-conferenceboard-ca.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/wpcontent/uploads/2022/10/real-talk_2024.pdf] that the technology could add close to 2 per cent to Canada’s gross domestic product, assuming businesses adopt it. That’s not nothing,
but it’s also not “life-changing,” according to Mr. Dobbs. “It’s really a judgment call on whether we try to keep up,” he said of building more compute.
Mr. Pantony at Boosted.ai [http://boosted.ai/] said the government doesn’t necessarily have to intervene, but it’s difficult to stay on the sidelines when other countries are making
moves. “You may run into a situation where it is no longer the invisible hand of the market controlling things,” he said.
There are ways for Canada to address its computational shortcomings without spending billions up front. Ryan Grant, an assistant professor at Queen’s University, has spent his career
helping build some of the largest supercomputers in the world. He left the country to work in the U.S. in 2012 and served as a principal technical staff member at a national research
lab, but returned home in 2021 to develop supercomputing talent here. “I knew that AI was going to be a major stumbling block in the future ,” he said. “People who had experience
working on the world’s largest systems didn’t seem to exist in Canada.”
Prof. Grant advocates for building a supercomputer tailored for training AI models – that’s where the need is greatest – as opposed to running them. The government would kick in the
funds to get it built, and companies would pay to access it below commercial rates. That money can be invested back into maintaining the system and paying for upgrades. “AI is
moving so quickly right now that you need to refresh every two or three years,” he said. Researchers in the public sector could make use of excess capacity for free, or have capacity
set aside at a reduced rate.
When it comes time to run AI applications commercially, companies would still have to buy access through a cloud provider. Prof. Grant said that might be a challenge, but it’s
nevertheless easier than finding dedicated resources to train models.
Canada could spend between $250-million and $350-million on such a supercomputer. Building one giant system (or more) of Herculean strength comes with problems beyond the
price tag. The most advanced systems in the world require more staff to operate them, use equipment that hasn’t necessarily been proven in the field and come with more processing
power than a country of our size knows what to do with. Canada should aim to have a system that can rank in the top 30 supercomputers in the world, not the top five. “The goal is to
be state-of-the-art so you’re on the cutting edge, but not the bleeding edge,” Prof. Grant said.
In many ways, Canada has already done the hard part when it comes to building an AI ecosystem: attracting talent in the first place. Building the infrastructure to support those people
should be comparatively easy. “It’s like we figured out how to build the best car in the world,” Prof. Grant said, “but now we need the factory and the production line to make that into
real dollars.”
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Canada’s AI infrastructure does not compute [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canadas-ai-infrastructure-doesnot-compute/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240321ek3l0015p

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

31/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

In face of staffing shortages, health care workers embrace AI for rote tasks and potentially life-saving alerts
By KELLY GRANT

1405 words
1 January 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

During one of her shifts on the internal medicine unit at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto, Yuna Lee received an alert on her phone from CHARTWatch, an AI-powered early-warning
system, indicating a patient in the ward was at high risk of dying or needing intensive care.
Dr. Lee, the division head of general internal medicine, checked on the woman and found nothing obviously amiss. She ordered extra blood tests, just to be safe.
The results revealed the patient's liver enzymes were elevated, prompting Dr. Lee to call for an ultrasound of her liver.
As the patient was about to be transferred to the imaging department, she spiked a fever and developed pain in her abdomen – the first overt symptoms of what turned out to be an
inflamed gallbladder. CHARTWatch, which was developed by St. Michael's data science team and analyzes hundreds of points of patient data to produce hourly risk scores, had
figured out something was seriously wrong before doctors or nurses did.
“That was very surprising," Dr. Lee said.
“It made me go, ‘Wow, CHARTWatch is amazing.' " CHARTWatch is one of the few examples of machine learning – a branch of artificial intelligence in which computer models,
trained on mountains of data, teach themselves to get better at a task over time – that has been integrated into the regular operations of a Canadian hospital long enough to
demonstrate results.
In the 20 months after CHARTWatch's launch in October, 2020, St. Michael's general internal medicine unit experienced a 26-per-cent reduction in the relative risk of death among nonpalliative patients compared with the same period in the four previous years, according to Amol Verma.
FROM A1 The general internist and University of Toronto professor of AI in medicine oversaw the development and implementation of the early-warning system.
While public debate about the promise and peril of artificial intelligence is increasing, the use of AI tools on the front line of Canada's medical system remains “very scarce,"
according to Bo Wang, the recently appointed chief AI scientist at Toronto's University Health Network.
The slow pace of adoption isn't the fault of Canadian AI scientists, whose research is among the most cutting edge in the world, said Barry Rubin, medical director of the Peter Munk
Cardiac Centre and one of the leaders of UHN's efforts to integrate AI into its hospitals.
There are simply “quite a lot of challenges with implementing AI in the health care setting," he explained. To name just a few: Provincial governments are reluctant to invest in the
necessary computing power at hospitals; privacy must be guaranteed when the anonymized data of thousands of patients are fed into artificially intelligent machines; and if the data
excludes some types of patients, the machines could teach themselves to be biased.
Most important, many AI models are not yet accurate enough to supplant the clinical judgment of human doctors. “The stakes are high," Dr. Rubin said, “because if you get it wrong,
you're influencing a patient's care."
That's why the AI solutions being deployed in Canadian hospitals tend, as with CHARTWatch, to complement physicians rather than replace them. For now, the country's health leaders
are most excited about the prospect of AI helping to alleviate a staffing crisis by taking rote tasks such as writing clinical notes off the plates of overworked nurses and doctors.
“I am absolutely convinced that advanced data analytics and artificial intelligence is going to transform health care as we know it," said Tim Rutledge, the president and chief
executive officer of Unity Health, the network that includes St. Michael's, St. Joseph's Health Centre and Providence Healthcare. “If we can automate tasks that are now laborious, it
allows our clinicians to spend more quality time interacting with patients."
St. Michael's has spent the past couple of years quietly testing about 50 different AI solutions in that vein. A $10-million donation from Hong Kong businessman Li Ka-Shing kick-started
the work.
About $5-million annually from the hospital's philanthropic foundation keeps it going.
On a recent afternoon, Muhammad Mamdani, the vicepresident of data science and advanced analytics for Unity Health, showed off a wall-sized whiteboard bristling with colourful
sticky notes charting the progress that he and his staff of 30 are making on different projects. (At the far end of the board, scrawled in black marker, was a riddle: “What chemical
element are data scientists most afraid of?" The answer was sodium. An early version of the CHARTWatch algorithm misinterpreted data about patients' sodium levels as being “not
available" because sodium's chemical symbol is Na.)
Along with CHARTWatch, other AI solutions developed at St.
Michael's include a tool for assigning emergency department nurses to different posts, such as triaging patients or working in the ER's resuscitation bay. That assigning task, which
used to require hours of manual input on an Excel spreadsheet, is now done by an algorithm in less than 15 minutes.
Another tool analyzes patient information that triage nurses punch into their computers and uses the data to produce waittime estimates that flash on a screen in the ER, cutting down
on the number of times harried staff members are asked, “How long will it be?" Yet another project synthesizes the electronic medical records of patients with multiple sclerosis into a
concise, visual timeline that is particularly helpful for junior doctors who may only have a 10-minute window to prepare for an appointment. The model can summarize seven years'
worth of charts in less than two seconds.
The advantage of having an inhouse development process is that it includes regular meetings with end users. The data science team is constantly tweaking models and monitoring
them after deployment to be sure they don't become less accurate over time, Dr. Mamdani said – a risk when intelligent machines train themselves in ways that aren't always clear to
their human creators.
So far, Health Canada, which has issued a growing number of licences for commercial software designed with AI functionality since 2018, has only approved devices that have their
algorithms locked. That means that manufacturers have to apply to Health Canada for a licence amendment if their AI-powered devices have the ability to learn or change , according
to André Gagnon, a Health Canada spokesman.
If the situation in the United States is any indication, applications for more sophisticated AIpowered devices are on the way here. As of mid-October, the U.S.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

32/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Food and Drug Administration had approved 171 AI and machine-learning -enabled medical devices, the vast majority of them in radiology, the specialty that interprets medical
images such as CT and MRI scans.
Neither the Canadian regulator nor the U.S. FDA have approved any medical devices that incorporate the type of Large Language Models (LLM) that power ChatGPT , the nowfamous chatbot developed by OpenAI. But they're coming. Google has trained its Med-PaLM 2 to provide sophisticated answers to medical questions, while Amazon Web Services and
a slew of competitors are rolling out products that use voice recognition and generative AI to turn conversations between doctors and patients into automatic clinical notes.
Dr. Wang's lab is developing an LLM-powered medical chatbot and automated clinical note generator called Clinical Camel with open-source software, which means anyone can see
the code underpinning it. He and Dr. Rubin are among the scientists warning of the risks of leaving LLM-powered medical solutions in the hands of corporate giants who keep their
algorithms secret, and who could take services offline if they become unprofitable.
Radiologist Jaron Chong has a different concern about artificial intelligence in health care delivery. Although there are more FDA-approved AI devices in his specialty than any other,
he is not worried his profession will go extinct. Rather, he fears that in Canada's penny-pinching, hidebound public-health system, human radiologists won't be able to adopt AI that
could make them better diagnosticians.
“There are hospitals today that still chart on paper," Dr. Chong said. If 30 years down the road, radiologists are doing higher volume but “using the exact same techniques," he added,
“I'll feel like we have failed."
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240101ek110000j

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

33/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

AI companies press Ottawa for exemption around copyright laws
By JOE CASTALDO

1124 words
22 June 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Artificial intelligence companies Cohere Inc. and Google have told the federal government that they favour a legal exemption allowing them to build commercial AI models using data
without being compelled to compensate or obtain permission from rights holders. The companies warned that such a requirement would impede the development of the AI industry in
Canada.
AI models, such as those powering chatbots like OpenAI's ChatGPT , are trained on huge and diverse quantities of data in order to produce coherent text. Companies pay for some
proprietary data but also use large volumes of material scraped from the internet, including works created by authors and media organizations.
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, along with Canadian Heritage, launched a consultation last fall to seek input on possible changes to the Copyright Act in
response to the development of generative AI systems, which produce text, images, audio and video.
One key question is whether AI firms should be required to license copyrighted material when training models for commercial purposes, or whether an explicit exemption should be
made in law. An exemption, known as fair dealing, already exists for using IP-protected material in research and educational contexts.
The rapid growth in generative AI and the legal uncertainties around copyright have sparked a number of high-profile lawsuits from authors, artists and news outlets against tech
companies such as OpenAI, Meta Platforms Inc. and Stability AI.
AI developers say they need access to data to build more powerful models, which they claim will help to improve work, life and society at large – and potentially generate massive
profits. But creative workers feel cheated as a result of having their material used without permission or compensation, and concerned about the impact of generative AI on their
industries.
Cohere, which builds large language models , which underlie chatbots and other applications, said in its submission that AI training does not infringe on copyright, making licensing
unnecessary. “Remuneration would not be appropriate," according to the submission, which was posted online recently.
The Toronto-based company argues that AI models learn concepts and facts by identifying patterns in large amounts of data.
“As these concepts, facts and patterns are not protected by copyright, copyright law should not be interpreted to prevent AI training," the company said.
Microsoft Corp., which has invested billions of dollars in OpenAI, argued there is a lack of clarity around how Canadian copyright laws apply to generative AI , and that a commercial
exemption would spur more AI development and investment in the country. “It is not a copyright infringement to learn from copyright-protected works, and the use of AI to read and
learn should not require compensation," the company wrote in its submission.
Other groups, such as the Association of Canadian Publishers, are opposed to an exemption and instead support licensing deals to pay creators for the use of their material in AI
training. An exemption “robs rights holders of a real and potential source of substantive income," according to the association, which added that a licensing market is already
developing for generative AI models.
But Cohere argued that rights holders would not benefit from new revenue streams if such a requirement were imposed, because it claims AI development would simply take place
outside of Canada. “It also could result in AI systems, including systems that are critical to advancing health care, addressing the climate crisis and closing Canada's productivity gap,
not being made available for use in Canada," Cohere said.
Google similarly argued that requiring licensing or permission would be “essentially impossible given the large amount of data needed to train AI models and the lack of comprehensive
data about copyright ownership," the company said in its submission.
“It would effectively block the development and use of large language models and other types of cutting-edge AI." Google added that it has introduced tools to allow web publishers to
opt out of having their content used to train future AI models.
All three AI companies pointed to Japan as an example for Canada to follow. The country has amended its copyright laws to permit AI training on copyrighted works for both commercial
and non-commercial purposes.
Groups that represent artists and other creatives have a starkly different view. “Governments should not create new copyright or other IP exemptions that allow AI developers to exploit
creations without permission or compensation," Music Canada said in its submission, which represents the Canadian divisions of Sony Music, Universal Music and Warner Music.
The trade group cautioned lawmakers to be wary of the language AI developers use to describe how their systems work, which Music Canada said is an attempt to frame generative
AI as already being exempt from copyright law. “They may use words like ‘learning,' ‘migration,' ‘memorization,' or ‘simulations,' instead of words that describe what their systems do to
learn: make ‘copies' and ‘reproductions,' " Music Canada wrote.
The Canadian Civil Liberties Association likewise advocated for licensing to respect copyright holders. “Just because these models need lots of data does not mean that data should be
mined with such little regard for the creatives whose work fuels it," according to its submission.
Many AI developers, including Cohere, have offered to indemnify customers who are sued for copyright infringement. OpenAI, the target of a few copyright lawsuits, has been busy
striking deals with a host of media organizations and publishers to use their content in training data, including News Corp., the Financial Times and the Associated Press.
These arrangements have come under criticism, too. AI companies are “pursuing business deals to absolve them of the theft," wrote Jessica Lessin, founder of tech news website The
Information, in an article in The Atlantic last month. “It's simply too early to get into bed with the companies that trained their models on professional content without permission."
Complicating matters for rights holders is the lack of transparency around what material is actually contained within massive training data sets, making it very difficult to find out if their
creative works have been used.
In submissions to the Canadian government, Cohere, Google and Microsoft objected to being compelled to document and disclose copyrighted material in their training data, saying
that it would not be feasible. “The copyright status of individual works contained in billions or trillions of datasets are effectively impossible to discern," Cohere wrote.
A spokesperson for Innovation Minister François-Philippe Champagne declined to comment on whether he is in favour of amending copyright law to allow for a commercial exemption.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

34/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

“As this market continues to evolve, we are committed to fostering a framework that supports creativity and innovation while upholding intellectual property rights," spokesperson
Audrey Milette said.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240622ek6m0002s

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

35/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

The great transformer – and disruptor
By TEMUR DURRANI

2248 words
20 August 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A8
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

New technology has helped The Globe adapt and reach new audiences for 180 years, but change has sometimes threatened its survival and the fate of journalism itself
George Brown, who founded The Globe in 1844, always wanted a national audience for his paper. He envisioned a country that would stretch beyond the united colonies of Upper and
Lower Canada (present-day Ontario and Quebec) and Atlantic Canada to include the vast lands to their north and west. To spread this message, he turned to new technologies that
were revolutionizing Victorian society.
About two months after publishing The Globe's first edition using a hand press that printed 200 copies an hour, Brown travelled to New York. There, he bought a rotary press from
famed inventor Richard March Hoe that could produce 1,250 copies an hour.
The state-of-the-art press transformed The Globe's reach, allowing the weekly to start publishing twice every week by 1846, and daily by 1853.
But he didn't stop there. After the electric telegraph arrived in Toronto, Brown signed a deal with one of his rivals, the British Colonist, to share the cost of a telegraph service from New
York. The new technology was a game changer . Before the telegraph, most news travelled at the speed of sail or horse and rider. Now, it could be transmitted almost instantly. Brown
later secured access to a second line from Montreal.
Brown also took advantage of improved roads and the new railway to deliver the paper into the southwestern communities that had then represented the limit of colonial settlement in
Upper Canada.
His obsession with technology made perfect sense. Canada, even before Confederation, was such a large land and so thinly populated that any newspaper seeking to be national in
scope needed to grasp any invention that solved the problems of distance and time.
All of this was expensive, but the investments paid off. By Confederation, The Globe's circulation had surpassed that of any other newspaper in British North America – reaching
15,000 people, as of 1868, more than half of whom were outside the paper's home in Toronto.
Brown established a template that future publishers have followed: Exploit new technology to establish and expand The Globe's reach across the nation and around the world. More
than once, this formula saved the paper.
Over the years, The Globe has celebrated several technological feats. The newspaper brought readers the first photograph wired to Canada on Dec. 9, 1936.
(The photo was of Wallis Simpson. King Edward VIII's decision to abdicate the throne to marry her dominated the news for weeks.) The Globe was the first subscriber to Bell's new
mobile telephone service, introduced in 1947, decades before the arrival of cellphones. (We predicted, somewhat prematurely, that “the day is rapidly approaching when Mr. Motorist
will pick up a telephone receiver in his car and tell his wife that he is caught in a traffic jam on Avenue Road and won't be driving into his garage for another seven minutes.")
But when Roy Megarry arrived as publisher in 1978, he didn't like what he saw. The Globe was shipping its six national editions across the country by air or post, which was costly and
inefficient. Editors had to manually lay out, proof and adjust pages with new stories for each edition – an old-school approach that Megarry found infuriating.
More significantly, The Globe's circulation was flatlining at around 300,000. It faced stiff competition in its primary market of Toronto; 60 per cent of the paper's readers in the city also
read the Toronto Star, which had lower ad rates and a much higher daily circulation of 500,000. The new Toronto Sun, launched after the demise of the Toronto Telegram, was also
attracting readers.
Megarry believed he had the answer to all these problems. The Globe could increase its circulation and justify higher ad rates by escaping the limits of the Toronto market and
becoming a truly national newspaper . And the way to do that, he bluntly told the paper's owners, was to invest in computer technology to deliver the paper by satellite.
“The Globe could never become the Star in Toronto," says John Stackhouse, former editor-in-chief of The Globe. “And so, with the satellite, suddenly we were able to sell in Canada's
other biggest cities."
When the Thomson family acquired the paper in 1980, they embraced the idea. On Oct. 23, 1980, The Globe and Mail was delivered for the first time across the country through
microwave signals flashed by a satellite high above the Pacific Ocean to printing plants from the farthest corner of the Maritimes to the edge of the West Coast – “one giant leap," the
newspaper declared on its front page.
The shift transformed the paper's business model. Before the satellite, in 1978, The Globe's daily circulation outside Ontario was about 12,000 customers. By 1992, it had reached
120,000.
“Thank you for saving The Globe," owner Kenneth Thomson told Megarry at the publisher's retirement dinner in 1992. The paper that year had reached a record-breaking $37-million in
profit.
“The Globe will need saving again, and again," Megarry predicted in reply. He was right.
In 1999, Edward Greenspon, then-executive editor, approached publisher Phillip Crawley about establishing a news website for The Globe and Mail. The timing was tough: The Globe
was embroiled in a newspaper war with the National Post, and that battle required management's full attention.
The Globe had a static website at the time, created by Globe Information Services (GIS), which displayed high-level data and insights. It launched earlier than other web pages and had
been a hit with techies, but the resource was not useful for a broader audience.
“What if the web posed an equal threat to The Globe as the newspaper war?" Greenspon recalls pondering. “What if we were losing out by not getting into the game and launching an
internet-based breaking news service?" In February, 2000, Crawley gave the green light for a news site that depended on GIS and newsroom collaboration.
The next 100 days were a frenzy. Greenspon travelled to newsrooms across the U.S., attended conferences and investigated best practices. He received advice on how to staff the
website, which articles to post right away and which to hold onto. He also learned about the dangers of letting stories be too long.
Some marketers wondered whether The Globe was too old and stuffy a brand for the internet. Maybe it should use a different name, as some other publications had done. Greenspon
and Crawley paid no heed. The paper intended to use its brand to expand its reach through the web.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

36/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Globeandmail.com launched on June 19, 2000. A team of 17 web journalists repackaged content from the newspaper and updated readers with fast-breaking news . When
terrorists flew airplanes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001, readers were glued to the website for the latest updates. When the federal Liberals chose a
new leader in December, 2006, a team of Globe writers filed incessantly to the web. When an earthquake shook Ottawa in June, 2010, with people fleeing and buildings swaying, The
Globe had a photo and a story online before any other news source.
But there was pushback, much of it from the newsroom itself. Some Globe journalists saw the website as a threat. Reporters did not want to share their work, considering it to be
cannibalizing their journalism . Digital journalists were dubbed “bloggers" or “renegades," and those words were not compliments. Eventually, however, all but the worst Luddites
accepted that the medium didn't matter; what mattered was preserving the paper's integrity.
“Everyone simply had to get on board," Greenspon says.
While globeandmail.com took steps to establish itself as a news website, elsewhere, another group of Globe staff were building a new online business.
That group, led by digital pioneer Lib Gibson, eventually became Globe Interactive, with its own offices on King Street in Toronto. Over the course of seven years, the team launched a
stream of successful products that gave The Globe a reputation for digital innovation and boosted the bottom line of s the business.
GlobeFund, launched in October, 1997, enabled users to track, rank and filter mutual fund data, revolutionizing access. GlobeInvestor allowed users to track their stock movements
multiple times a day, instead of waiting for the paper to deliver the previous day's data.
Gibson and Crawley persuaded their bosses to shift Globe careers advertising online, through what became Workopolis in January, 1999. It was a bold move, given the founding
partners were two longtime print rivals, The Globe and the Toronto Star.
But it worked: Workopolis rapidly became Canada's top jobs site, and La Presse soon joined. Within a few years, Workopolis was contributing half of The Globe's profits. (In 2006, The
Globe sold its 40-percent stake in Workopolis to its Torstar partner.)
GlobeInvestorGold, a subscription site delivering real-time stock quotes without a 20-minute delay, opened up another revenue stream for The Globe.
Nevertheless, despite all of these innovations, a harsh new truth had emerged: While the internet offered many opportunities, it also posed a lethal threat to every newspaper ,
including The Globe.
From the very beginning of the internet, most news content was free – and readers assumed it would remain that way.
Publishers debated how to monetize the huge readership they were reaching on the web. Could advertising, which sustained the print edition, support the digital product? Was the
answer to charge for a digital subscription and introduce online paywalls?
While owners dithered, walls caved in. Many city papers found that classified ads evaporated with the arrival of Craigslist in the early 2000s, though The Globe was less affected. Then,
tech giant Google and the fast-rising social-media platform Facebook hollowed out much of the digital ad revenue that remained. Smartphones replaced desktops, laptops and tablets
as the primary venue for reading news .
How could you make money displaying news content on a phone?
Too often, newspaper owners in Canada and the U.S. responded with layoffs and cuts, leading to poorer-quality journalism and diminishing readership. Newspapers started
closing down. The Guelph Mercury. The Halifax Daily News . The Cambridge Reporter. The Prince Rupert Daily News . Dozens of other weeklies and dailies.
To avoid such a fate, The Globe had to act fast. In 2010, the paper relaunched its print edition, with new state-of-the-art presses and glossy stock for some pages. In 2012, the
newspaper announced the rollout of its digital subscription package, providing free online access to print subscribers and allowing online-only readers access to 10 free articles a
month.
Then, in 2015, The Globe turned to artificial intelligence . A proprietary system named Sophi helped predict which content was most valuable to readers, in turn helping maximize
digital subscription revenue.
Sophi became a vital tool in The Globe's editorial process, allowing editors to determine, through extensive analytics, what kind of content audiences value and are willing to pay for. In
August, 2023, The Globe sold Sophi to Mather Economics, a global subscription and revenue management company.
While Sophi has been important, it is only a tool.
Major investigations remain part of the paper's mandate, regardless of analytics, as they have since The Globe first detailed widespread abuse at the Kingston Penitentiary in the
1840s. Whether it is probing the struggle of thalidomide survivors as they age, the underreporting of sexual assaults by police, Chinese interference in Canadian elections, or
government efforts to suppress information, the mandate of the paper remains to investigate and report.
Artificial intelligence is expected by many to change nearly every facet of society, with both investors and developers salivating at its potential.
The perils of this new technology are equally plain: deepfake videos and photos of politicians, or even songs mimicking celebrities, are running rampant.
For journalism , AI stands as both a threat and an opportunity. Disinformation and misinformation are becoming more extensive and harder to detect, even as public trust in Canadian
news declines – hovering around 40 per cent in Canada in 2024, according to a Reuters poll.
The Globe has developed guidelines to harness this technology while preventing errors and abuses.
The new rules include close scrutiny of AI-generated research and data, a prohibition on AI-generated writing for publication and alerting readers to any AI-generated visuals.
Still, other challenges remain. Will digital subscriptions grow to the level needed to preserve the core functions of the newsroom and the bureaus across the country and around the
world? Can supplementary revenue streams help the bottom line without distracting from the core mission of the organization? The Globe is a newspaper and site that also hosts
luxury cruises, while renting out an event space at its Toronto headquarters for weddings and conferences.
For 180 years, this newspaper has used every tool at its disposal to explain what is happening and why it matters to readers across this vast land. We don't plan to stop.
This is an excerpt from A Nation's Paper: The Globe and Mail in the Life of Canada, a collection of history essays from Globe writers past and present, coming this fall from
Signal/McClelland & Stewart.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240820ek8k0000l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

37/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

Federal Court bans judges from using AI in decisions for time being
By SEAN FINE

1039 words
9 January 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Canada's Federal Court is promising to keep its judges from using artificial intelligence in decisionmaking before it consults the public, a cautious approach that follows controversial
judicial uses of machine-learning tools in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions.
Courts in several provinces, including Manitoba, Alberta and Nova Scotia, have issued directives to lawyers, self-represented litigants and intervenors on how they may use automated
tools in court filings. But the courts, including Canada's Supreme Court, have been mostly silent on how judges themselves may use the tools.
The Federal Court said in a statement posted on its website late last month that while artificial intelligence offers the potential for considerable benefits, it also has risks – to the
independence of judges and public confidence in the justice system.
“This is an area that warrants great caution," Chief Justice Paul Crampton told The Globe and Mail in an interview on Monday.
“I would be troubled if I thought the judges were using ChatGPT to write their decisions, or if their decisions were in any way being influenced by AI, by machines.
Because we don't have enough of an understanding of their processes and what underlies their algorithms, and what the nature of the biases is."
The Federal Court is based in Ottawa but its judges travel across the country to hear cases. It deals with matters under federal jurisdiction such as national security, immigration and
intellectual property; provides a forum for claims against Ottawa; and reviews decisions by federal ministers and administrative bodies.
Chief Justice Crampton pointed to concerns about the “dehumanization of the law" expressed by U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts in his annual report on the federal
judiciary. “At least at present," Chief Justice Roberts wrote, “studies show a persistent public perception of a ‘human-AI fairness gap,' reflecting the view that human adjudications, for
all of their flaws, are fairer than whatever the machine spits out."
Chief Justice Crampton said, for instance, that in cases involving refugees, or family reunification, or student or skilled-worker visas, “there are nuances that machines aren't going to
grasp."
Artificial-intelligence programs might offer comments on matters “about a certain group from a certain country" without being sensitive to “considerations that a human would know,"
he said.
He said he is not aware of Federal Court judges using content from generative AI . He said, however, that there are legitimate uses of AI intended to speed up court processes; the
court's technology committee plans to try out AI on the translation of court decisions, to be reviewed by a translator or jurilinguist to ensure accuracy.
“The translations get generated in a matter of seconds and then the ‘human in the loop' would verify it in a matter of days as opposed to weeks and months" – a time saver made more
vital by amendments to federal law requiring that all precedent-setting decisions of a federal court be made available simultaneously in English and French. (The amendments come
into force in June.)
Legal observers said they appreciate the court's caution, as artificial intelligence could make the public skeptical about how judges write their reasons for judgment in any given
case.
“The use of AI – or the perception of the use of AI – risks undermining the role of reasons," lawyer Jeremy Opolsky said.
“That they are produced not through careful contemplation but at the click of a button. AI could mean a dramatic change in how we administer justice and this requires caution."
The Canadian Judicial Council, a body of chief and associate chief justices, said in an e-mail it is monitoring developments in Canada and internationally, has held discussions with
experts and will continue to discuss the matter, and may at some point issue a directive.
The Federal Court's policy statement echoes a directive from B.C. Supreme Court Chief Justice Christopher Hinkson last March, which asked judges not to use artificial intelligence .
It said that after an incident in which a judge in Colombia used artificial intelligence , Chief Justice Hinkson asked a technology committee to look at its use.
That committee recommended judges not use ChatGPT or similar platforms, finding such use “inimical to the integrity of the judiciary and public confidence in the courts," in part
because the use of AI “raises ethical questions as to whether decisions are a judge's alone."
Chief Justice Hinkson said in his directive that he accepted the recommendation, and asked his colleagues on the B.C. Supreme Court to refrain from using artificial intelligence until
further notice.
The Colombia case involved a ruling on whether an autistic child's medical costs should be covered by insurance. The judge in that case asked ChatGPT whether a child was exempt
from paying for their treatment costs – an apparent off-loading of decision-making, in the view of critics. In the end, both ChatGPT and the judge came to the same conclusion, that
insurance should pay.
It was not the only controversial example of how courts are using artificial intelligence . In Wisconsin, a judge imposed a long jail sentence on a Black offender based on an AIgenerated risk assessment.
Gavin MacKenzie, a lawyer specializing in ethics, said he expects that artificial intelligence is already being used by some judges and administrative bodies.
“Lawyers (including me) make use of AI in their practices," he said in an e-mail. “I would be surprised if at least some judges and members of administrative tribunals haven't done so."
He called the Federal Court's approach a sensible one in its recognition of potential benefits and risks.
Gideon Christian, a University of Calgary law professor, is studying bias in the use of artificial intelligence for recidivism risk assessments in the criminal-justice system. He said the
courts are wise to adopt a flexible, go-slow approach.
“As the technology continues to evolve, and as guidelines and best practices are developed, we might see a gradual increase in the adoption of AI tools in judicial work, always
ensuring that such usage aligns with the principles of justice and fairness," he said.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

38/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240109ek1900011

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

39/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

opinion/contributors

Here's what we need to do to keep Canadian journalism alive
Joshua Krane
695 words
23 June 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The launch of the iPhone in 2007 was a turning point for journalism in Canada and around the world. The internet had already changed the industry by that point, wiping out the
classified business and creating publishing tools that allowed anyone with a word processor to push their thoughts out to the entire world. But the iPhone mushroomed all of those
trends. Suddenly, anyone could take a picture, "report" a story, and upload it all to social media, instantaneously. Anyone with a smartphone now has the potential to go viral.
News media companies initially believed search and social platforms could be used to expand the audience they offer to advertisers. More readers, more clicks and more eyeballs
meant more money coming in the door - until it didn't.
Today, about two thirds of all the money spent on advertising in Canada is spent on digital campaigns, and the majority of that goes, not to newspapers or magazines, or anyone else
producing the news , but to Google and Meta. The two digital behemoths have come to dominate the global online advertising business. Between them, they booked more than half a
trillion dollars
Canadian in advertising revenue around the world last year.
For organizations that produce quality reporting and investigative reporting that consolidation has been catastrophic. Now, the growth of generative AI is threatening to make all of that
worse. We are not far from a future where AI tools will be able to scrape the internet for information and present it in the "style" of a particular outlet or reporter, all without delivering
a click, let alone a dollar, to the people and institutions that did all the real work.
My worry is this will lead to the end of the newsroom in Canada, as income streams for news organizations finally evaporate. Canadians in that future will get their news from AI or
social media, which are already replacing real journalists in this country as go-to sources of "truth." The unfortunate implication, and we're already seeing it now, is that these
influencers - who are often not constrained by editors or safety controls- can peddle their extreme views, driven by algorithms, to ever larger audiences than they already do now.
It doesn't have to be that way. Some publications are already fighting back. The New York Times sued OpenAI last year for allegedly stealing Times content to train ChatGPT and its
predecessors. Canadian media outlets could consider similar measures. But these lawsuits take time, and they cost money. The Times spent a million dollars on the OpenAI suit in the
first quarter of 2024 alone.
Thankfully, antitrust law provides another front. When enforced, antitrust laws can be powerful tools to promote competition, revitalize industry and reduce concentration. The United
States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission recently launched investigations into the roles Microsoft, OpenAI and NVIDIA are playing in the AI space. It's time
those tools were applied in Canada, too. Last year, a coalition of Canadian news organizations asked the Competition Bureau to investigate Meta's decision to block news on its
platforms. That same watchdog is already investigating Google's dominance of the online advertising industry.
The very recent changes to Canada's Competition Act will allow news organizations to pursue their own antimonopoly claims before the Competition Tribunal. A win against Google,
Facebook, or an AI giant at the tribunal could allow those news organizations to obtain damages and claw back benefits derived from monopolistic behaviour. It could also empower
the tribunal to order the break-up of a monopoly to restore competition in the marketplace.
Canadian democracy cannot function without rigorous, robust Canadian news . It's time for the leaders in this country to stand up and make that clear. News organizations play a
critical role in our democracy. We need them to thrive or the AI future may be a troubling one indeed.
The New York Times sued OpenAI last year for allegedly stealing Times content to train and its predecessors. Canadian media outlets could consider similar measures.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240623ek6n000eg

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

40/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Generative artificial intelligence is simply a waste of our time and money; Generative artificial intelligence have the potential
to create enormous social costs without any significant social benefits
Kean Birch
787 words
4 April 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Kean Birch is director of the Institute for Technoscience & Society at York University.
Increasingly, generative AI seems like a waste of our collective time and money. While generative AI technologies, like ChatGPT , have some playful uses, they potentially come
with enormous social costs and limited social benefit.
To understand these social costs, we have to understand generative AI . It’s not an autonomous, intelligent system, able to think and decide like we do. Instead, as Emily Bender and
colleagues [https://dl-acm-org.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/doi/10.1145/3442188.3445922] emphasize, generative AI is a mimic of human action, parroting back our words and images. It
doesn’t think, it guesses – and often quite badly in what is termed AI hallucination.
Understanding generative AI as probabilistic systems highlights the social costs that follow from their development.
AI depends upon computing capacity: the more AI we deploy, the more computing capacity we need. Not only does this take computing capacity away from other, potentially more
useful activities, it requires an enormous amount of energy. These environmental costs [https://newrepublic.com/article/179538/environment-artificial-intelligence-water-energy] are
well-known, but they will get significantly worse as AI spreads. Sam Altman [https://www.popsci.com/technology/sam-altman-age-of-ai-will-require-an-energy-breakthrough/] , chief
executive of OpenAI, reinforces this point with his argument that AI needs an “energy revolution ” to be successful. Even leaving aside the ecological costs, AI’s power-hungry nature
will lead to rising energy prices across society.
Then there’s the fact that AI is underpinned by significant capital investment in computing infrastructure. AI is built on the back of fibre optics, servers, data centres, etc. We can see the
cost of this in Big Tech’s corporate reports, which highlight the billions they’ve spent and are spending on this infrastructure. Big Tech now controls much of our computing capacity
(which is a social cost in itself), but we will need to invest considerably more to make AI commercially viable as an everyday technology. This investment could go somewhere else,
more useful.
AI is also sucking up innovation funding, especially venture capital. According to CBS Insights [https://www.cbinsights.com/research/generative-ai-funding-top-startups-investors-2023/]
, venture capital spending on generative AI jumped fivefold between 2022 and 2023, reaching close to US$22-billion. In a shrinking venture pool, that money could, again, have been
used elsewhere. More important, though, commentators like Ed Zitron [https://www.wheresyoured.at/peakai/] point out that if the AI hype bubble bursts, which appears to be likely, then
all that innovation funding will have been wasted (as would all the capital investment).
As AI continues on this trajectory, it is threatening to overwhelm us with AI spam. AI needs data to train models, but content producers – such as newspapers , websites and authors –
are now challenging the scraping of their copyrighted content by suing organizations like OpenAI. More critically, as AI becomes saturated with AI-produced “data” released into the
internet, it will collapse in on itself: As political economist Jathan Sadowski poetically puts it, we are facing the growing social cost from “ Habsburg AI
[https://twitter.com/jathansadowski/status/1625245803211272194?lang=en&ref=wheresyoured.at] ,” by which he means artificial intelligence technologies that are “so heavily trained
on the outputs of other generative AIs that it becomes an inbred mutant, likely with exaggerated, grotesque feature.” This means hallucinations upon hallucinations, creating all sorts of
unforeseen consequences.
Perhaps most important, AI entails passing the buck for its social impacts on to the rest of society, even when it provides no social benefit. AI will necessarily lead to significant social
change and associated costs as we are forced to transform our social, political and economic institutions to deal with the fallout from its effects. Even something as basic as AIgenerated images will create a collective cost when it comes to dealing with their effects on our political institutions; for example, it’s going to cost a fortune to adapt our political system
to protect ourselves against generative AI ’s turbo-charging of political misinformation.
The heart of the problem is that generative AI is not really designed to address actual social problems. We urgently need the expertise of social scientists to be able to make muchneeded collective decisions about the future of generative AI that we want; we can’t leave it to business, markets or technologists. We need to turn to these experts to understand
our social or collective problems and the challenges we want generative AI to address. We then need to work out whether – not simply how – artificial intelligence can contribute to
finding viable solutions, and then getting AI companies to focus on producing those solutions.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Generative artificial intelligence is simply a waste of our time and money
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/commentary/article-generative-artificial-intelligence-is-simply-a-waste-of-our-time-and/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240404ek44000rt

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

41/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Other

AI might try to come for journalism – but here’s why it won’t succeed; Reputable news organizations aren’t using AI to
replace reporters, editors or photographers, but to support and scale their work
Sandra E. Martin
1074 words
30 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

It sounded like every journalist ’s nightmare. In October, a Polish radio station made international headlines after laying off journalists , only to replace them with AI-generated on-air
presenters [https://apnews.com/article/poland-media-artificial-intelligence-radio-cbae50063b8f125c99a4a0f6d3ee82d8] .
Off Radio Krakow, a branch of Poland’s public broadcasting service, called the move an “experiment” [https://off.radiokrakow.pl/newsy/posluchaj-jak-brzmi-off-radio-krakow-tworzoneprzy-udziale-narzedzi-sztucznej-inteligencji] intended to address the station’s low audience numbers, as well as to explore “the opportunities and threats that the development of
artificial intelligence brings.” (Disclosure: I used Google Translate [https://translate.google.ca/?sl=auto&tl=en&op=translate] to translate that quote from text on the Off Radio Krakow
website.)
In short order, audience numbers surged to 8,000 from next to none, but once they tuned in, many didn’t like what they heard. At one point during the “experiment,” the AI-generated
host dubbed Emilia Nowak “interviewed” a dead Nobel Prize-winning poet – a segment consisting exclusively of synthesized voices; it was not well-received. And, ultimately, outrage
among the ousted journalists and listeners, more than 24,000 of whom signed an online petition
[https://www.petycjeonline.com/apel_rodowiska_kultury_i_mediow_w_sprawie_sytuacji_w_off_radiu_krakow_i_zastpienia_pracownikow_sztuczn_inteligencj] to reinstate human
presenters, persuaded the station to revert to its human-hosted format.
This will almost certainly not be the media’s last experiment with AI – and in many cases that’s not a bad thing. Reputable news organizations aren’t using AI to replace reporters,
editors or photographers, but to support and scale their work.
“That’s a starting point for us: to go back to real hardcore journalism and then see how generative AI models can help us to do that better,” Olle Zachrison, the head of artificial
intelligence and news strategy at Swedish Radio, told the Reuters Institute [https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/news/how-swedish-radio-balances-ai-and-journalism-withoutfalling-hype] .
For example, an algorithm or AI tool can help journalists comb through data much more quickly than they would be able to manually, and to identify patterns within large swaths of
information that reveal an important story. A transcription tool eliminates the need to re-listen to lengthy recorded interviews to type them out.
AI can automatically generate summaries of sports results and corporate earnings; the Associated Press [https://www.ap.org/solutions/artificial-intelligence/] wire service has used this
technology since 2014. The Globe also publishes a small number of AI-generated stories that provide information on publicly-traded companies on stock pages, alongside other thirdparty content and related Globe-written articles. ( Scroll down this page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BBD-A-T/] to see recent examples.)
If you key a question into The Globe’s Climate Exchange [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/the-climate-exchange/] page, its search tool will use AI to match your question to
the answers editors have provided in advance. It’s a way to “chat” with Globe journalists at any time of the day or night.
Similarly, the Australian philosopher Peter Singer had developers create a chat bot so he could (virtually) respond to a larger number of his followers’ questions than was possible via email, instructing the developers to avoid providing concrete answers to any questions he, himself, would not answer in concrete terms. (Try asking a question here
[https://www.petersinger.ai/] .) While it isn’t the same as one-on-one exposure, tools like this can allow subject matter experts to engage with news audiences at any time and in any
place that’s convenient for readers.
So, we’ve established that artificial intelligence can be used as a newsroom resource. But how can readers tell it’s being used ethically?
The answer can be summarized in a few words. The first is transparency. Reputable news organizations have established policies for working with AI, and publish these for both staff
and audiences to consult as needed. You can read The Globe and Mail’s policy here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-a-note-on-ai-and-the-globe-and-mail-newsroom/]
.
Human supervision is the other critical aspect of ethical AI use. Transcription tools are known to “mishear” parts of a recorded interview. AI research tools have been found to “
hallucinate [https://www.ibm.com/topics/ai-hallucinations] ,” providing made-up information in their responses. A human being with critical thinking skills must review any AI output to
confirm its accuracy.
At worst, unsupervised AI use can damage lives, as the Reuters Institute reported [https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/news/ai-generated-slop-quietly-conquering-internet-it-threatjournalism-or-problem-will-fix-itself] : “Earlier this year, Hong Kong-based BNN Breaking accompanied a story about an unnamed Irish broadcaster’s trial for sexual misconduct with a
photograph of a prominent Irish TV and radio host who had nothing to do with the case. The mistake was a result of the use of an AI chatbot to produce the piece.” The person whose
photograph was misused is suing BNN Breaking. It became the subject of a New York Times investigation [https://www.nytimes.com/2024/06/06/technology/bnn-breaking-ai-generatednews.html] , which found the site was using generative AI to cobble together supposedly original articles. The site closed in April of this year.
At the very least, using AI without guardrails can be reputationally damaging, as Sports Illustrated [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/sports/article-sports-illustrated-artificialintelligence/] learned last year after allegedly publishing AI-generated articles provided by a content partner. As The Globe reported last November, the articles bore the hallmarks of
machine generation, incorporating bland language and sometimes nonsensical statements, such as, “Volleyballs aren’t as complicated as many people think.”
Although many journalists have expressed fear that generative AI will replace human creators, readers are already noticing and flagging copy they suspect is synthesized. On a few
occasions, Globe subscribers have e-mailed me to ask whether an awkward typo was the result of AI copy-editing. For the record: it was not.
And what about the next generation of journalists ? I got a sense of the view these digital natives have on artificial intelligence when I was invited to attend an awards presentation
for students of Toronto Metropolitan University’s School of Journalism this month.
Addressing the group, the school’s chair, Ravindra Mohabeer, shared that instructors were worried that students would use Chat GPT as a shortcut to completing assignments. Then,
he said, the students tried Chat GPT and concluded: “This is really bad.”
The future of journalism appears to be in good hands.
Coming soon: Standards Q&A
If you have questions about The Globe’s journalism – from ethics to story selection to newsroom policies and processes – we’d like to answer as many of them as possible in a
coming video series. Submit your questions to tgam.ca/standardseditor .

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

42/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: AI might try to come for journalism – but here’s why it won’t succeed [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/standardseditor/article-ai-might-try-to-come-for-journalism-but-heres-why-it-wont-succeed/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241130ekbu000dy

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

43/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

business/mars

Intelligent by design: Human experience creates better AI
Sarah Liss
1294 words
7 February 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Canada is a bit of a prodigy when it comes to artificial intelligence . Geoffrey Hinton and Yoshua Bengio's game-changing research on artificial neural networks in the early 2000s
helped establish the field, and in 2017, Canada became the first nation to launch a national AI strategy. The country now has one of the world's most robust AI ecosystems: Canada
tops the global list in terms of expanding its talent pool over the past half-decade. It's also a leader among G7 countries when it comes to funding and innovation.
Even so, the country has been slow to adopt AI technology on a broader scale. News stories about deep fakes and nefarious applications of ChatGPT have made many Canadians
wary; in one recent study, 91 per cent of respondents expressed fear that the technology could manipulate public opinion. This is one reason why public participation in the
development and adoption of large language models and other forms of AI is so crucial. Not only is it important to ensure the public has accurate, adequate information, but, as Elena
Yunusov points out, technology needs to account for "humans in the stack" - that is, factor in the people behind the data. Yunusov heads up the Human Feedback Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to bringing more transparency to AI. "If we are integrating this technology into fundamentally human systems like finance, like health care, like education, you're
shooting yourself in the foot if you're not involving humans."
The good news ? There are plenty of developments that show the real benefits of taking a human-centred approach to AI.
Check, please: Stress-testing the algorithms
With so many headlines about LLMs going rogue (and potentially veering into nuclear territory), it's no wonder most people are calling for guardrails. According to a recent report, more
than three-quarters of Canadians believe AI should be subject to government regulation. While broader societal policies are still in flux, a number of solutions have emerged within the
private sector. Toronto-based Armilla AI, for instance, works with companies to assess their AI tools to head off crises (such as sensitive info leaks or easily manipulated chatbots) at
the pass. CEO Karthik Ramakrishnan recognized the need for such insurance after seeing how easily data could be mined. "If we want to unlock wider adoption of artificial
intelligence and get its benefits, then we need to minimize its risks and build trust in these models," he says. "We do that by taking an engineering-based approach and stress-testing
systems in every situation and format possible."
Meanwhile, Radical Ventures assesses AI ethics from a different POV. The Toronto-based firm helps investors evaluate startups to make responsible decisions. As senior director Leah
Morris explains, the company's framework is rooted in principles from the non-profit sector, where organizations must determine whether a project's net benefits outweigh possible
detrimental effects. "We identify potential risks, the likelihood of them occurring and the impact if they do occur," she says. While these guidelines are tailored toward VCs, whose
influence can be crucial in helping founders develop products at an early stage, Morris says they're relevant for anyone engaging with AI tools . "You can get as superficial or as deep
as you'd like with those three questions: What's the benefit to me? What are the risks to me? Do benefits outweigh the risks?"
Better bots: Building smarter machines
Although the prospect of robots who behave and "think" like we do may seem alarming to anyone familiar with, say, the
"Terminator" films, those qualities are precisely what Sanctuary.ai is working to harness. The Vancouver company's robotic assistants are meant to work in tandem with people to
perform essential tasks with humanlike precision - tackling labour shortages and bolstering workplace safety by ensuring no real human is placed in harm's way. The key is ensuring
that this technology is developed and maintained with careful oversight.
Combining AI and robotics can also be a tremendous boon for those with disabilities. The University Health Network is exploring many different AI applications, including various rehab
tools and, through its KITE program, the possibility of integrating bionic limbs and smart glasses to assist people with visual and physical impairments navigate space.
Green giants: Harnessing AI to protect wildlife
It may seem unlikely, but AI can play an integral role in bolstering biodiversity. Montreal's Whale Seeker uses non-invasive technology to accurately monitor marine species, allowing
commercial vessels to navigate waterways without harming aquatic life, as well as providing important data about protected species and the impacts environmental changes are
having on them. Meanwhile, on land, Montreal-based startup Nectar promises to "give bees a voice," tackling the looming problem of apian extinction by using sensors, a solarpowered wireless network and data-based prediction to monitor hives and gather data for optimal beekeeping results.
The next green challenge: AI gobbles up a tremendous amount of energy, which has significant ramifications for the climate and overall health of the planet. How can we work to build a
more sustainable infrastructure? Organizations like Untether AI are working to streamline AI operations so that companies can operate their neural networks with a (literally) cooler and
more efficient system.
Doctor's orders: Giving the health-care system a boost
Canadian health care needs a wellness check. Across the country, providers are struggling to do more with less - and the lack of resources has had a profound impact on those who
need care. The desire to relieve burned-out clinicians by relieving them of non-essential tasks prompted Mahshid Yassaei and her colleagues to establish Tali.AI in 2020. As she
describes it, the company's "ambient scribe" - which records and transcribes consultations - is like "having a magic notebook that automatically writes down everything important
without anyone having to hold a pen." The tool allows doctors to be fully present - which means patients feel more seen and heard - and frees up time for actual diagnostic care. In line
with Canada's robust regulations, the platform has been developed with a keen sense of safeguarding patient privacy: audio and other identifying details from consultations is not
stored, and the company is committed to minimal data collection. And Yassaei notes that it has many additional applications, including predictive analytics, diagnostic support and
remote monitoring.
AI can also fill other gaps in the health-care system. In 2023, Kids Help Phone announced it was incorporating tech - developed in partnership with the Vector Institute to help address the overwhelming demand for its services. Similarly, after receiving an influx of queries, the founder of the trans-inclusive clothing line Rubies developed a chatbot to
help support transgender youth and their parents. (Gender-affirming care is especially difficult to find, and for trans youth, it can be the difference between life and death.)
As Elena Yunusov notes, one of the biggest challenges in ensuring technology is developed for positive impact is that people often trust a computer rather than their own gut. "There's
machine bias in the sense that humans prefer machines over humans," she says, "and in AI, that's no longer a viable paradigm." Working with "the human in the stack" will require
resources and creative problem-solving, but "the outcome will be technology that is usable and safer and, hopefully, good for society."
Sarah Liss writes about technology for MaRS. Torstar, the parent company of the Toronto Star, has partnered with MaRS to highlight innovation in Canadian companies.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

44/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

If you're interested in learning more about this technology and its applications, check out the MaRS Impact AI conference on Feb. 22.
MaRS_AI_trends.jpg
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240207ek27000m9

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

45/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

Media outlets team up to sue OpenAI; Canada's major news organizations say content used illegally to train software
Josh Rubin
851 words
30 November 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

A broad coalition of Canada's major news organizations, including the Toronto Star, Metroland Media, Postmedia, The Globe and Mail, The Canadian Press and CBC, is suing tech
giant OpenAI, saying the company is illegally using news articles to train its ChatGPT software.
It's the first time all of a country's major news publishers have come together in litigation against OpenAI.
The suit, filed in Ontario's Superior Court of Justice Friday morning, seeks punitive damages, disgorgement of any profits made by OpenAI from using the news organizations' articles,
and an injunction barring OpenAI from using any of the news articles in the future .
" Journalism is in the public interest. OpenAI using other companies' journalism for their own commercial gain is not. It's illegal," said a joint statement from the media organizations,
which are represented by law firm Lenczner Slaght. None of the allegations contained in the suit have been proven in court.
In a written statement, an OpenAI spokesperson defended the company's conduct.
"Hundreds of millions of people around the world rely on ChatGPT to improve their daily lives, inspire creativity, and solve hard problems. Our models are trained on publicly available
data, grounded in fair use and related international copyright principles that are fair for creators and support innovation," the spokesperson said.
But in a memo to employees sent shortly after the suit was filed, Torstar CEO Neil Oliver accused OpenAI of using published work without permission.
"We will not stand by while tech companies steal our content. While we embrace the opportunities that technological innovation can bring, all participants must follow the law, and any
use of our intellectual property must be on fair terms," Oliver wrote.
He added that the work produced by the company's journalists is vital to democracy - and to the company's bottom line.
"You put your names, and Torstar's name, behind your work, taking on all of the public accountability that this entails. The journalism we produce is at the core of our business model
and is essential to our democracy and the communities we serve," Oliver wrote in the memo to staff.
The suit seeks up to $20,000 in statutory damages per article used by OpenAI, which could put the total value of the suit in the range of billions of dollars.
The suit accuses OpenAI of using articles without the news organizations' consent to help train ChatGPT , a generative artificial intelligence chatbot which responds to prompts and
questions from users.
"To obtain the significant quantities of text data needed to develop their GPT models, OpenAI deliberately 'scrapes' (i.e. accesses and copies) content from the news media
companies' websites ... It then uses that proprietary content to develop its GPT models, without consent or authorization," the suit alleges.
The fact that OpenAI has signed licensing agreements with other media organizations to pay for content is a sign the company knows it's in the wrong, argued Lenczner Slaght partner
Sana Halwani in an interview with the Star.
Halwani, who's leading the legal case for the news organizations, said OpenAI's use of the articles might be different than copyright infringement from another era, but that doesn't
make it right.
"The uses (to) which they are putting those copies is something new and different, because it's this new technology, but copying is copying," argued Halwani, who said OpenAI's
"scraping" of the articles violates the terms and conditions of each publisher's website.
The argument of fair use - known as "fair dealing" under Canadian copyright law - doesn't hold water here, she added.
"Let's remember that this is a commercial entity making money from the content that they're taking ... That's not an allowable purpose under the fair dealing exception," Halwani said.
Independent technology analyst and writer Carmi Levy said the entire artificial intelligence industry has plenty at stake.
"You cannot have a ChatGPT unless you turn the technological equivalent of a vacuum cleaner loose on the open internet. The Large Language Model cannot exist unless a massive
amount of data is ingested," he said.
The suit follows similar litigation from news organizations around the world seeking compensation from OpenAI for the use of published work in training ChatGPT , one of the most
popular consumer software applications ever produced.
OpenAI has already signed licensing agreements with some media organizations. Last July, it signed a licensing agreement with U.S.-based news service The Associated Press.
It has also reached agreements with NewsCorp and Condé Nast.
A suit by the New York Times against OpenAI and partner Microsoft is also underway, with lawyers for the newspaper accusing OpenAI's engineers of erasing evidence the
newspaper 's lawyers had gathered for use in the trial.
OpenAI has also faced litigation from co-founder Elon Musk.
Earlier this week, the Wall Street Journal reported that OpenAI was valued at $157 billion (U.S.) after its latest round of fundraising from investors.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241130ekbu000a7

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

46/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

news/gta

'These things could get smarter than us': Toronto Nobel laureate warned of risks of AI from its earliest applications
www.thestar.com
1815 words
8 October 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Geoffrey Hinton, a University of Toronto computer scientist, has grappled more deeply with the dangers, opportunities and mushrooming uses for artificial intelligence than most
people alive today. He is a "godfather" of machine learning , after all - and his breakthroughs in the field were awarded the Nobel Prize in physics Tuesday, in a citation that echoed
Hinton's own cautions about the risks to humankind.
Canada gained a new Nobel laureate when Hinton got the call from Stockholm early Tuesday morning in what he described as a cheap hotel in California.
He was co-awarded the prize with
Princeton University researcher John Hopfield, who also made foundational breakthroughs; the two will split the prize of 11 million Swedish kronor (about $1.45 million Canadian
dollars) equally,
with Hinton telling reporters he plans to donate his winnings to causes such as creating employment opportunities for neurodiverse young adults.
"I'm flabbergasted," Hinton said.
Hinton toiled for years in relative obscurity in a field few thought would yield results, subsisting on modest Canadian grants, until he and two students published a breakthrough in 2012.
The trio were soon snapped up by Google, where Hinton worked for the next decade, splitting his time between the tech giant's California headquarters and his home in Toronto's
Annex neighbourhood.
Last year, however, Hinton quit Google in order to speak more freely about what he sees as the growing dangers of artificial intelligence . The news sent shock waves across the
industry and the broader public, launching the dialogue about "AI safety" into the mainstream.
A family of scientists
Hinton was born in the U.K. to a family of accomplished scientists: His paternal great-great-grandparents were the mathematician
Mary Everest
Boole
and the logician George
Boole, whose invention of Boolean algebra underpins modern computing. His father was an entomologist, discovering many new species of beetles, and his mother was a math
teacher. He recalls her telling him it was OK if he didn't get a PhD, in a tone that clearly suggested it was not.
Hinton switched majors several times as an undergraduate student, trying to find a subject that would allow him to understand the human brain, and by extension the human mind. But
he found philosophy, physiology and psychology all unsatisfactory to the task, though he eventually graduated from Cambridge University
with a degree from the psychology department.
To win the Nobel prize in physics was especially shocking, Hinton said in a news conference Tuesday, since he'd dropped out of a physics class as an undergraduate due to the
complex math involved.
As a PhD student, Hinton's adviser allowed him to indulge his interests in the then-unpopular "neural networks," algorithmic models designed to mimic the structure of the human brain.
As the committee that awards the Nobel Prizes noted, however, "some discouraging theoretical results caused many researchers to suspect that these neural networks would never be
of any real use." That didn't deter Hinton, who earned his doctorate in 1978 from Edinburgh University.
"There is a lot of pressure to make things more applied; I think it's a big mistake,"
Hinton told the Star in 2015. "In the long run, curiosity-driven research just works better," he said.
"Real breakthroughs come from people focusing on what they're excited about."
A pull to Canada
After getting his PhD, Hinton bumped around various American universities. But most of the funding for artificial intelligence research at the time came from the U.S. Defense
Department, and Hinton was deeply concerned about the technology being utilized for weapons on the battlefield.
As a result, he came to Canada in 1987, both to avoid entangling his research with the U.S. military and because
he was attracted by a position at the University of Toronto that offered the maximum amount of time to pursue basic research. Hinton and other AI pioneers from this time also credit the
support of CIFAR, a Canadian-based research organization that nurtured research into the field starting in that decade.
The presidents of U of T and CIFAR, Meric Gertler and Stephen Toope, said they were incredibly proud of Hinton's accomplishments and grateful for his leadership in the Canadian AI
ecosystem, while Mayor Olivia Chow said she was "thrilled" to see him win the prize.
Hinton "could have lived anywhere. We are proud he chose Toronto as his home," Chow said.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which awards the Nobel Prize, cited Hopfield and Hinton's work in the 1980s that established the foundations for artificial neural networks.
But after a burst of enthusiasm in this period tied to these breakthroughs, interest receded again when the systems faltered on more difficult tasks, ushering in an "AI winter."
Hinton, toiling away in his very modest office near College and McCaul Streets on the U of T campus, continued to be unfazed by these struggles in real-world applications.
On Tuesday,

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

47/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Hinton expressed his appreciation for Canada's scientific funding bodies, noting their support for exploratory work without obvious applied functions. "There isn't as much money as
there is in the U.S., but it uses its money quite wisely," he said of his adopted home.
Breakthroughs
Hinton and his graduate students began publishing research in the 2010s that sparked renewed interest in the field. The big breakthrough came in 2012, when Hinton and two of his
students,
Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever, entered an image recognition contest. The neural network they built was so good at correctly identifying images
- a person, a cat - that it leapt over the previous best-performing algorithms, taking a big stride towards the success rate of humans.
Google snapped up the trio of U of T researchers, paying millions to acquire the company they formed. For the next decade, Hinton would spend part of the year at the company's
Mountain View, California headquarters, working on a team then called Google Brain, where the company's research on artificial intelligence was underway.
That decade saw a kind of arms race for artificial intelligence talent across the biggest tech giants, who snapped up the then-small pool of researchers. Many of Hinton's former
students are now working in the upper ranks of companies like Meta and Apple. The neural networks Hinton and his colleagues developed now underpin many of the computer tasks
we take for granted, like the ability to identify which rare species of wildflower you've just taken a picture of on your phone, or automatically translate speech from a different language.
Ilya Sutskever, Hinton's former graduate student who was originally snapped up by Google, left the company after three years to co-found OpenAI. The company launched ChatGPT ,
an artificial intelligence chatbot, in 2022, which immediately stirred both huge interest and concern for its humanlike conversational abilities.
Warnings
Hinton had always been concerned about the marriage of artificial intelligence and military weapons, and had believed that the technology risked replacing human jobs with bots and
algorithms. But he thought these risks would not pose a real threat to society for many decades, because the algorithms were still not smart enough.
That all changed with what he saw as improvements in AI's capacity to mimic or even outperform human thinking. In May 2023, Hinton said he was leaving Google in order to speak
more freely about what he saw as these serious risks.
Hinton has enumerated many concerns about the risks of AI since then, from improving surveillance to even existential threats to humanity. At this year's Collision Conference in
Toronto, he told an audience that "As I left Google, I figured I could just warn ... that in the long run, these things could get smarter than us and might go rogue. That's not science
fiction...That's real."
Google, OpenAI, and other major players in the field insist that they care deeply about AI safety. But Hinton and others have insisted that governments need to institute better guardrails
on the technology, and that we as a society need to have deeper conversations about these risks.
At Tuesday's news conference, Hinton outlined his hopes for AI technology improving productivity in health care, noting how much public money in Ontario is spent delivering health
services.
He sees its potential specifically for improving diagnostics, suggesting AI could be used to interpret scans with a human radiologist providing a second pair of eyes. He also sees it as
promising in the area of family medicine, arguing that AI could use data from more patients than any one doctor could ever see to diagnose an ailment.
While he once believed that shift would have already happened, he now sees those earlier predictions as "over-enthusiastic." The medical system has often been slow to adopt new
technology, he said, though with good reason. "If people die when you make a mistake, it's a good policy to be conservative," he said.
But for all its potential, Hinton used his spotlight Tuesday to once again warn about the potential dangers of AI if more guardrails aren't put in place - listing immediate risks including
"fake videos corrupting elections" and more sophisticated cyberattacks.
He plans to dedicate the rest of his career to delivering those warnings. "I'm 76, and I'm not going to do much more frontier research," Hinton quipped.
The Academy, in awarding Tuesday's prize, also cited the risks of AI.
"While machine learning has enormous benefits, its rapid development has also raised concerns about our future ,"
Ellen Moons, a member of the Nobel committee at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, said.
"Collectively, humans carry the responsibility for using this new technology in a safe and ethical way for the greatest benefit of humankind."
With files from Victoria Gibson and The Canadian Press
Two pioneers of - John Hopfield and Geoffrey Hinton - won the Nobel Prize in physics Tuesday. (AP video by Daniel Niemann/ production by Javier Arciga / Oct. 8, 2024) pioneers John Hopfield and
Geoffrey Hinton were awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for discoveries and inventions that formed the building blocks of . World AI leader Yoshua Bengio celebrated the win. (AP Video / Oct. 8, 2024)
John Hopfield and Geoffrey Hinton awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics (AP Video / Oct. 8, 2024) John Hopfield and Geoffrey Hinton - won the Nobel Prize in physics Tuesday for helping create the
building blocks of that is revolutionizing the way we work and live but also creates new threats for humanity. (AP Video / Oct. 8, 2024) AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton backstage at the Collision Conference, in
Toronto in June. British-Canadian cognitive psychologist and computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton, known as the "godfather of AI."
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241009eka80000j

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

48/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

How to deal with the tsunami of AI-generated hallucinations; Problems ensue when humans and organizations uncritically
use artificial intelligence content for tasks
Ian P. McCarthy
786 words
2 July 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Ian P. McCarthy is the W.J. VanDusen Professor of Innovation and Operations Management at Simon Fraser University.
In the 1970s, portable calculators transformed our ability to do math. Today, generative chatbots such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google’s Gemini are driving similar changes in our
professional and personal work. Unlike calculators, chatbots can produce incorrect or fabricated responses, known as hallucinations. When humans and organizations uncritically use
this untruthful chatbot content for tasks, it becomes what collaborators and I call “botshit.” [https://doi-org.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/10.1016/j.bushor.2024.03.001]
This content is a risk, because the large language models that underlie how chatbots work generate responses by predicting patterns of words that seem useful based on their
training data. These predictions do not involve knowing the meaning of their responses. So, while the responses are sometimes coherent, useful and correct, they are often riddled
with inaccurate content.
When an Air Canada chatbot gave a passenger incorrect advice [https://www.forbes.com/sites/marisagarcia/2024/02/19/what-air-canada-lost-in-remarkable-lying-ai-chatbot-case/]
about how to claim a bereavement fare for flying to a family funeral, the airline argued in court that it should not be held liable as the chatbot was a separate legal entity responsible for
the veracity of the responses it provided. The court rejected this argument and ruled for Air Canada to pay the passenger damages and court fees. Similarly, a B.C. Supreme Court
judge [https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/lawyer-chatgpt-fake-precedent-1.7126393] reprimanded a lawyer for submitting case documentation that contained ChatGPT
hallucinations.
These examples clearly highlight the hazards of uncritically using chatbots to generate content for different types of work. To learn to effectively use chatbots we need to understand
and mitigate the epistemic risks associated with this untruthful content. This involves chatbot users considering two questions when using the technology for work: How important is
chatbot response veracity for the task? And how easy is it to verify the veracity of the chatbot response? The answers to these two questions lead to four different modes of chatbot
work: authenticated, autonomous, automated and augmented.
When a chatbot’s response veracity to a task is difficult to verify, and the response veracity is unimportant, a user can use the chatbot in an augmented way. This means chatbot
responses should not be used as a final input or output for a task, but rather as a trigger to help generate or refine ideas for tasks. For example, when asking a chatbot to suggest a title
for a report or to edit a speech, the response should not be used as is but should be sifted through, questioned, edited and used to help enhance the professional in their work, rather
than generate and spread false content.
When it is hard to verify the veracity of a chatbot response and response veracity is crucial, users would engage in the authenticated mode of chatbot work. A lot of legal, journalism ,
academic and health care work should not blindly use chatbot-produced content because of the harmful consequences that come from producing and sharing hallucinations. Users
need to know the abilities, scope and limits of the chatbot they are using and do the necessary verification to ensure responses are factual and error-free.
When it is easy to verify chatbot outputs that are required to be accurate, the chatbot work can be automated. Users assign simple, routine and relatively standardized work to a chatbot
that can be easily verified. Translation work, calculations, data analysis and scheduling are examples of automated chatbot work. The scope of the work and the large language
models are limited and focused so it can be routinely trusted.
If a chatbot response can be easily verified, yet the response veracity is relatively unimportant, this would be an autonomous mode of work that is selectively delegated to chatbots.
This work includes low-stake verifiable tasks such as routine customer inquiries or common administrative inquiries where the likelihood and resulting harm of sharing false content are
both low.
In the 1970s, society did not have to worry about calculators producing incorrect responses, as their arithmetic logic and processing were unfailing. Chatbots do not have the same
calculating reliability as they predict responses based on training data. For chatbots to be used effectively, their responses should be thought of as provisional knowledge [https://doiorg.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/10.1016/j.respol.2018.02.018] that needs to be questioned, checked and edited in line with the veracity extractions of the work. Thus, mastering the use of
chatbot-generated provisional knowledge requires practices to be tailored to the modes of chatbot work and associated hallucination risks.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: How to deal with the tsunami of AI-generated hallucinations [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/commentary/articlehow-to-deal-with-the-tsunami-of-ai-generated-hallucinations/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240702ek72000jh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

49/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

NET BENEFITS
By Jeff Jarvis
1881 words
12 October 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
O8
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Sure, the internet has its problems, but let's stop and consider what a privilege it is to have all its advantages at our fingertips, Jeff Jarvis writes
Jeff Jarvis is an emeritus professor at City University of New York. His latest book is The Web We Weave: Why We Must Reclaim the Internet from Moguls, Misanthropes, and Moral
Panic, from which this essay has been partly adapted.
I come to defend the internet – not its corporations, but its freedoms – because somebody has to.
Yes, the internet is accused of many sins – though in truth, most of those faults are our own. For the internet is a human enterprise.
Some say the internet makes us hate. No, we brought our centuries of biases and fears online with us.
Others say the internet has killed truth. But take for example the recent right-wing blood libel about the good people of Springfield, Ohio, eating cats and dogs.
This sprang from the sick minds of malign politicians and bad actors, not algorithms or artificial intelligence .
The internet is accused of “surveillance capitalism," of tracking us for the sake of advertising greed. Remembering your interest in a pair of boots to show you an ad for them is hardly
surveillance. Surveillance is what we fear from looming authoritarian regimes armed with weapons more powerful than browser cookies.
The internet is said to corrupt our youth. But research tells us that to attribute the distress of young people today to their phones is a facile distraction from deeper problems: academic
and social pressure, climate degradation, economic frailty and, in the United States, school shootings and the Supreme Court robbing women of control over their bodies.
Are we addicted to our phones? Well, society has been accused of addiction to everything from radio to television to video games. In 1880, The Hour magazine fretted: “Millions of
young girls and thousands of young boys are novelized into idiocy. Novel-readers are like opium smokers: the more they have it the more they want of it, and the publishers, delighted
at this state of affairs, go on corrupting public taste and understanding and making fortunes out of this corruption."
We have been here before, yet always forget. The media fuels moral panic about new technologies and competitors without ever acknowledging its own conflicts of interest. The result,
too often, is policy and laws that can affect the freedoms of everyone.
So let us pause for just a moment and give thanks for the internet, aware of how privileged we are to live in its age with the benefits it brings. We should begin by acknowledging how
the internet has helped us weather the COVID-19 pandemic, allowing so many to continue working, learning, staying in touch with family and friends, and ordering life's necessities
online. Without it, economies would have collapsed.
And that's far from all the internet enables: A culture of information.
I know: The internet is said to be a web of misinformation, disinformation, “fake news ," conspiracies and lies. In some places, that's true. But recall what seeking information was like
before the internet: Wanting a fact, one was left hauling down a massive, dusty and immediately out-ofdate printed encyclopedia, likely ending up frustrated by its dearth, or driving to a
library, or calling the overworked librarian (some folks called the local newspaper ) – or more likely just giving up and expressing an opinion anyway.
Now we expect facts, background and explanations to be available instantly. And – unless confronting some crazy uncle's conspiracy theory – we expect those we debate to at least try
to get their facts straight, or we will do it for them. In seconds, we can look up the side effects of drugs, the history of a law, the price of a car, recipes for flourless chocolate cake:
anything. Curiosities can be satisfied as never before.
Consider, too, the human miracle that is Wikipedia, maligned by some teachers and librarians at the start but now – thanks to its carefully wrought systems of checks and balances to
allow expert and amateur volunteers to collaborate and correct each other – it is a useful and usually credible source of information about more than six million topics in English.
Encyclopaedia Britannica's last print volume, released in 2010, carried only 40,000 articles.
Note well that the online encyclopedists of Wikipedia are far more reliable with facts than AI tools such as ChatGPT .
A culture of conversation.
Once again, you might think me crazy, given that public discourse online is so often said to be a rank cesspool of hatred and trolling. I can't know what your social feeds are like, but
mine are, all in all, useful, pleasant, entertaining and informative (though I realize it is easier for me to say that because I am a white man, a tenured professor, and a journalist
accustomed to living in public). I am grateful for the opportunity to talk with people of many interests and experiences anywhere in the world.
The internet allows anyone connected to it to speak at last without the printing press or broadcast tower, able to break free of the presumptions, power and pigeonholing of the press
and public-opinion pollsters.
While the nuance of true public discourse is lost in polls and reporting on them, the internet allows individuals to speak on their own terms, in their own terms.
Today, as a public, we are relearning how to hold a conversation with ourselves. We are frankly doing a bad job of it, often letting long-pent-up frustration get the better of us, being
drawn into trolls' webs of anger and deceit, and falling for the seductive headlines of old media and algorithms of new media, both of which value our attention more than our
consideration. The hosts of our current conversation, meanwhile, are doing a terrible job of protecting us from malign actors and manipulation. We can do better. Some days, we do.
A culture of creativity.
Until the internet, every artist, anyone with talent to share, had to brave a gauntlet of gatekeepers to have their creations seen: approval by agents, editors, publishers, producers and
curators who doled out to a favoured few the scarce supply of publications' space, stage time, broadcast airtime and gallery walls they controlled. The internet ends that scarcity. On
YouTube and TikTok, Instagram and Etsy, on blogs or Medium, through Patreon and Kickstarter, anyone can now create anything to share with the world, often using new tools and
technologies that bring the skills of design, illustration and filmmaking to more people – all the more so as generative AI helps people express themselves in ways they could not
before. Is some of this creativity crap? Most of it? Sure; always thus. But it cannot be denied that as more people are able to create and share, more talent will emerge from broader
perspectives, producing a greater wealth and diversity of art, creativity and culture of value than ever was possible before.
Our challenge is to find the best of it.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

50/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Of course, there is no guarantee of success, but the measure of success has changed as well. In the blockbuster economy that fuelled mass media, the definition of “big enough" was
huge.
Now big enough is in the eye of the performer. Spotify's former chief economist, Will Page, reports that since the streaming platform's founding in 2009, the number of British
songwriters has exploded by 146 per cent to 160,000 and the number of recording artists almost doubled to 139,000. Major music labels still exist, and they release 1.2 million tracks a
year, but DIY artists release 9.5 million. In 2000, Mr. Page says, the industry's taxonomy of genres was limited to a dozen and a half; now Spotify tracks more than 5,000.
A culture of joy.
Every day the internet brings me joy. On TikTok, I sometimes watch a brilliant young musician and director of music at Pembroke College, Cambridge, named Anna Lapwood, who
shares her love of her instrument, the organ, as she records rehearsals in the dead of night at the Royal Albert Hall. She inspires young people to study music and has earned
recording contracts and magazine covers. I watch Biko's Manna, a remarkable trio of siblings in Johannesburg, aged 8 to 16, who sing beautifully, with joy. I chortle at the cynical
grumblings of the anonymous, monotone, grumpy guy at Chef Reactions who just can't believe some of the stupid things TikTokers cook. If you want to accuse me of being addicted to
TikTok, fine. I am addicted to joy. It beats the hell out of letting cable news doomscroll the world for me.
A culture of commerce.
Some say capitalism is already the ruin of the internet, motivating companies to extract and exploit value from us to build their monolithic, monopolistic corporations. Yes. But the net
also allows the little guy to set up shop and fund, design, manufacture, market, sell and distribute products and services on a small scale without the need for large capital investment. It
allows my entrepreneurial journalism students to serve small markets and communities, and make a living doing so.
Yes, Amazon threatens to kill bookstores just as the big-box stores before it killed mom-andpop hardware stores, and a century and a half ago the first chain supermarkets doomed the
corner grocery store. But as customers, the net provides us with an unprecedented choice of products at competitive prices.
Note, too, that social media has changed customer service by empowering consumers to hold public hissy fits. I cannot count the number of times I've been frustrated by endless hold
music or customer-service people handcuffed by their scripts. So I've turned to Twitter (I'll never call it X) to beg for help from a cable company, airline or store and quickly received aid
because we, the customers, now have the power to embarrass even big companies in public, on the net.
A culture of connection and community.
Every time I see a complaint about people ignoring other people in favour of their screens, I think of archival photos of crowded trains, every nose buried in a newspaper . With our
phones, who is to say we are not interacting with more people more of the time than was ever possible before? Most of the time on my phone, I'm listening to or interacting with people,
not machines.
I value the connections I have made over the past three decades with individuals – newly made friends, colleagues and conversationalists – and also with communities, assembling
together with people of shared interest and sometimes organizing action, whether friendly get-togethers or protests. The internet has given life to the idea of the public as a mass. It has
revealed the beautiful, tangled web of many publics that has always made up society.
Does the internet have problems? Of course it does. It is, again, a human endeavour. I hope we may reclaim our internet from the technologists, moguls and moral panickers who rule it
now to build its future on our terms. To do that, we should begin by examining what is worth keeping.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020241018ekac00003

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

51/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Tuesday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
2977 words
5 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Thomson Reuters ( TRI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TRI-T/] ) were higher after it reported higher than expected third-quarter revenue of
US$1.72-billion on Tuesday, as it continued to invest in generative AI .
The Toronto-based content and technology company said it was spending more than US$200-million on AI investments in 2024. This was up from more than US$100-million in 2023,
executives said.
Thomson Reuters also said it now has about US$10-billion to spend on potential acquisitions through 2027.
“We remain focused on driving innovation across our portfolio and markets to best serve our customers, demonstrated by our investment in AI now increasing to more than $200 million
in 2024,” Thomson Reuters CEO Steve Hasker said in a statement.
Thomson Reuters products already include Westlaw AI and CoCounsel, which is a chat-based generative AI (GenAI) assistant that can help legal professionals draft documents, sift
through research and locate information scattered across sources.
In August, Thomson Reuters announced the acquisition of Safe Sign Technologies, a British-based company developing large language models for the legal industry.
In October, it announced the purchase of Materia, which makes so-called agentic AI assistants, which can perform tasks and solve complex problems on their own, for the tax and
accounting industries.
Mr. Hasker said in an interview that new technology acquisitions could apply to the broader product portfolio in the future .
Thomson Reuters will also introduce one way to track the value of its generative AI investments to the business, chief financial officer Michael Eastwood said in an interview.
Mr. Eastwood said about 15 per cent of Thomson Reuters’ underlying annual contract value, which breaks down a contract’s total value by year, of about US$6-billion now comes from
generative AI .
Thomson Reuters reported an 8-per-cent rise in quarterly revenue to US$1.72-billion, which LSEG data showed was just ahead of analyst expectations . Adjusted earnings per share
for the period were 80 US cents. Wall Street had expected a profit per share of 76 US cents.
The company said it now expected full-year organic revenue to rise by about 7 per cent, up from an earlier expectation of about 6.5 per cent. Organic revenue is reported on a
constant currency basis and excludes the impact of acquisitions and asset sales.
Acquisitions helped drive revenue rises at some of the “Big 3″ Thomson Reuters businesses, with revenue at its legal, corporates, and tax and accounting businesses up by 9 per cent.
Reuters News revenue, which rose 10 per cent, benefited from acquisitions and generative AI -related licensing revenue.
Sun Life ( SLF-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SLF-T/] ) rose after it reported a better-than-expected third-quarter profit on Monday as Canada’s secondlargest life insurer benefited from robust growth in its domestic and U.S. businesses.
The earnings beat was primarily driven by strong insurance sales within Sun Life’s group businesses - which provide health and protection benefits to employer and government plan
members - both at home and in the United States.
Underlying earnings from Sun Life’s Canada business rose 11 per cent to $375-million in the quarter.
“These results reflect our leadership positions in asset management and insurance, driven by strong insurance growth,” CEO Kevin Strain said.
Underlying earnings in the U.S. business jumped 18 per cent to $219-million in the quarter, driven by strong growth in group benefits insurance sales.
U.S. group sales jumped 26 per cent to $300-million, driven by dental and employee benefits sales, Sun Life said.
The company’s U.S. dental business continued to face headwinds, driven by the impact of the Medicaid renewals following the end of the public health emergency.
Meanwhile, Sun Life’s wealth and asset management posted underlying earnings of $474-million, a 4-per-cent rise from prior year, driven by higher fee income.
Assets under management jumped 13 per cent to $1.52-trillion from a year earlier.
The company’s underlying net income was $1.02-billion, or $1.76 per share, in the three months ended Sept. 30, compared with $930-million, or $1.59 per share, a year earlier.
Analysts on average had expected Sun Life to earn $1.70 per share, according to estimates compiled by LSEG.
Bigger rival Manulife Financial ( MFC-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MFC-T/] ) is slated to report its results on Wednesday.
St. John’s-based Fortis Inc. ( FTS-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/FTS-T/] ) saw gains after it reported a third-quarter profit of $42- million, up from $394million in the same quarter last year.
The electric and gas utility says the profit amounted to 85 cents per share for the quarter ended Sept. 30, up from 81 cents per share a year earlier.
Fortis says the increase was driven by rate base growth across its utilities, and strong earnings in Arizona largely reflecting new customer rates at Tucson Electric Power.
Revenue in the quarter totalled $2.77-billion, up from $2.72-billion in the same quarter last year.
On an adjusted basis, Fortis says it earned 85 cents per share in its latest quarter, up from an adjusted profit of 84 cents per share in the third quarter of 2023.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

52/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The average analyst estimate had been for a profit of 82 cents per share, according to LSEG Data & Analytics.
Cargojet Inc. ( CJT-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CJT-T/] ) jumped after saying it earned $29.7-million in the third quarter, almost triple the $10.5-million
it earned a year earlier.
The Mississauga-based air freight and plane leasing company says its revenues totalled $245.6-million, up 14.8 per cent from $214.0-million during the same quarter in 2023.
Diluted earnings per share were $1.78, up from 61 cents a year earlier.
Co-chief executive officer Jamie Porteous said the company benefitted from interest rate cuts and cooling inflation.
Mr. Porteous said these factors are helping foster a more stable and optimistic economic outlook for Canada.
However, he added that geopolitical uncertainty is affecting the entire transportation industry and that Cargojet is not immune to significant cost increases facing aviation companies
and supply chains.
In a note, ATB Capital Markets analyst Chris Murray said: “Revenue from the domestic network/ACMI/Charter of $205.4mm (ATBe: $201.4mm) increased 15.5 per cent year-over-year,
driven by outperformance in All-In Charter (up 60.2 per cent year-over-year) on new contracts and demand for ad hoc services. Margins were slightly below ATBe as CJT added block
hours in Q3/24 in response to increasing demand conditions, incurring certain “one-time costs”, limiting operating leverage. Management confirmed that easing macro pressure remains
supportive of domestic volumes heading into peak season, with demand for global air cargo service remaining intact. CJT announced that it has renewed its NCIB with leverage levels
and improving FCF generation supportive of an outsized repurchase program, particularly with demand conditions strengthening. CJT delivered solid Q3/24 results reaffirming our view
that demand conditions on the domestic network are normalizing and the impact of new charter contracts, which we expect to support the go-forward margin and FCF generation. We
expect a neutral market response.”
Boeing’s ( BA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BA-N/] ) U.S. West Coast factory workers accepted a new contract offer on Monday, ending a bitter sevenweek strike that halted most jet production and deepened a financial crisis at the troubled planemaker.
The union said members voted 59 per cent in favor of the new contract, which includes a 38-per-cent pay rise spread over four years, easing pressure on new Boeing CEO Kelly
Ortberg after two previous offers were voted down in recent weeks.
Shares of the planemaker were up on Tuesday.
“This is a victory. We can hold our heads high,” Jon Holden the union’s lead negotiator, told members after the results were announced. “Now it’s our job to get back to work.”
The end of the first strike in 16 years by Boeing’s largest union provides welcome relief for a company that has lurched from one setback to the next since a door panel blew off a nearnew 737 MAX plane in mid-air in January.
In a message to Boeing employees after the vote, Mr. Ortberg said he was pleased the union had ratified a deal.
“While the past few months have been difficult for all of us, we are all part of the same team,” he said. “There is much work ahead to return to the excellence that made Boeing an
iconic company.”
Around 33,000 machinists who work on the best-selling 737 MAX jet, as well as the 767 and 777 widebodies, have been on strike since Sept. 13, demanding a 40% wage increase and
the restoration of a defined-benefit pension they lost a decade ago for a 401(k) retirement plan.
“I’m ready to get back to work,” said David Lemon, a worker in equipment calibration certification in Seattle who voted in favor of the contract.
He calculated that the pay hike and a 4-per-cent bonus - the guaranteed minimum annual payout to the reinstated incentive plan - amounted to the 40-per-cent increase they’d gone
after. “We got there,” he said.
Palantir ( PLTR-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PLTR-N/] ) shares jumped on Tuesday after the data analytics firm raised its annual revenue forecast for
the third time, bolstering investor confidence that the artificial intelligence boom was fueling demand for its services.
The company is among the biggest stock market winners of the generative AI boom, with its shares more than doubling in value this year — a rally that has sparked concerns over its
steep valuation.
But Palantir’s results late on Monday allayed some of those fears as demand rose thanks to its AI platform, which is used to test, debug code and evaluate AI-related scenarios, as well
as its government-oriented services that include software to visualize army positions.
Palantir raised its revenue forecast to between US$2.805-billion and US$2.809-billion for 2024, from its previous projected range of US$2.742-billion to US$2.750-billion.
For the third quarter, the company saw its revenue from U.S. government contracts surge 40 per cent, which made up more than 44 per cent of its total sales of US$725.5-million.
“We see a long runway of growth in the government sector, owing to the massive demand for AI-first solutions across governmental functions such as the military and healthcare,”
Morningstar analysts said.
But the analysts cautioned that the stock’s recent surge in value means that “any bump in the road, such as sales execution challenges or weaker-than-expected top-line growth or
guidance, could materially affect the stock’s valuation.”
It trades at a forward price-to-earnings ratio of 95.43, compared with 25.60 for peers Oracle and 126.92 for Snowflake.
Palantir stock has outperformed the S&P 500 index this year. It was added to the benchmark index late-September.
Yum Brands ( YUM-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/YUM-N/] ) rose despite reporting a surprise fall in worldwide same-store sales on Tuesday as its KFC
chain grapples with sluggish demand in the U.S., as well as choppy international sales.
KFC’s same-store sales in the U.S. tumbled 7 per cent, marking their third straight quarter of declines this year.
The drop came even as Yum in August launched US$5 offers on two new items under its “Taste of KFC” value menu, including eight-piece chicken nuggets pack as well as a chicken
nugget meal bowl in addition to the two-piece drum and thigh meal.
The company was responding the ongoing “value wars” in the fast-food industry from peers such as McDonald’s and Burger King.
The chain, like many of its peers, has also contended with diners seeking deals and discounts when eating out to counter menu prices that remain high.
Yum’s Tex-Mex food chain Taco Bell, in contrast, remained a bright spot. U.S. same-store sales rose 4 per cent, the 11th straight quarter of increase.
The company’s worldwide comparable sales fell 2 per cent, compared with market expectations of a 0.23-per-cent rise, as per data compiled by LSEG.
In international markets, the Pizza Hut parent faced the protracted impact from boycotts related to Israel’s war in Gaza.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

53/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Sales impact from the conflict had surfaced in several other markets beyond Malaysia, Indonesia and the Middle East, executives had said in August.
Burger King parent Restaurant Brands International missed quarterly revenue expectations on Tuesday, while McDonald’s reported its biggest quarterly global sales drop in four years
last week.
Excluding items, Yum earned US$1.37 per share in the third quarter ended Sept 30. Analysts on average were expecting a profit of US$1.41 per share.
DuPont de Nemours ( DD-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/DD-N/] ) increased after it raised its full-year profit forecast above Street estimates on Tuesday
after the industrial materials maker beat third-quarter earnings target on strong demand for electronics and artificial intelligence -based technology.
New orders improved in the U.S. manufacturing sector in September, primarily driven by an AI surge and increased China demand, which helped DuPont raise its profit target for a third
time.
The manufacturer has also been benefiting from falling interest rates and lower material prices.
DuPont’s electronics and industrial unit, the biggest in terms of turnover, reported a 13.4-per-cent rise in third-quarter net sales.
Overall sales in the Asia-Pacific markets jumped 8 per cent from a year earlier, while the U.S. markets gained 2 per cent.
The company raised its 2024 adjusted earnings forecast to around US$3.90 per share, up from US$3.70 to US$3.80 it previously forecast, and above analysts’ expectations of
US$3.77, according to data compiled by LSEG.
However, DuPont estimates net sales to be around US$12.37-billion for the year, below the lower end of its earlier range of US$12.40-billion to US$12.50-billion. Analysts’ were
expecting US$12.44-billion.
The company said it expects normal seasonal declines in the electronics and construction markets in the fourth quarter.
For the third quarter, Dupont reported an adjusted profit of US$1.18 per share, well above analysts’ average expectation of US$1.03.
On the decline
Restaurant Brands ( QSR-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/QSR-T/] ) missed estimates for quarterly revenue
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-tim-hortons-parent-restaurant-brands-misses-analysts-estimates-as/] on Tuesday due to weak demand across key businesses such
as Tim Hortons, Burger King and international markets including China and the Middle East.
The Toronto-based company’s shares fell lower.
Consumers are relying on cheaper, home-cooked meals instead of eating out as fast food prices have risen over the past year, hurting traffic at Burger King, McDonald’s and others in
the restaurant industry.
Steady demand for cold drinks, donuts and breakfast bundles at Tim Hortons drove quarterly same-store sales growth of 2.3 per cent at the coffee chain, but Burger King declined 0.7
per cent, compared with a 6.6-per-cent rise last year.
The company reported net income of US$357-million, down from US$365-million in the prior-year period.
Total revenues for the three months ended September 30 came in at US$2.29-billion, below analysts’ expectations of US$2.31-billion, according to data compiled by LSEG.
In a research note released before the bell, Citi analyst Jon Tower summarized the release, saying: “3Q top-line results demonstrated weakness across most brands/markets including
TH Canada comps slowing beyond Citi/Street expectations (up 2.7 per cent vs. 5 per cent/4.5 per cent) and global net unit growth of 3.8 per cent falling short of CIti/Street estimates
(up 4.3 per cent/up 4.5 per cent), both of which should come as little surprise to investors given C3QTD competitor comments. While management spoke to global comp trends
improving in Oct (as well as committed to 8-per-cent-plus AOI growth), we believe the results/outlook will do little to assuage investor concerns regarding ongoing comp choppiness and
potential implications for unit growth plans into ‘25.”
Boyd Group Services Inc. ( BYD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BYD-T/] ) dropped after releasing third-quarter results that fell short of the Street’s
expectations .
The Winnipeg-based company reported adjusted EBITDA of $80.1-million, down 8.6 per cent year-over-year and below the consensus estimate of $87.8-milion. Adjusted earnings per
share fell 45.3 per cent to 15 cents, which was 33 cents lower than anticipated.
“We’d argue that most of the bad news is priced in (stock down 30 per cent from its March peak), although the shares could weaken today given the headline miss and slowing M&A,
which we believe tie into management’s more cautious tone around long-term guidance,” said TD Cowen analyst Derek Lessard. “This may be tempered by BYD’s industry
outperformance (and share gains) which should put it in a stronger position once market turbulence subsides.”
He added: “More cautious tone on near-term outlook. Management remains committed to reach its goal of doubling 2019 sales by 2025 (constant-currency), but notes the possibility of
a slight delay given the unfavourable market conditions. However, the company did announce a modest 2-per-cent increase in the annual dividend to C$0.61 (from C$0.60)”
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Tuesday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-tuesday-november-5-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241105ekb5001xh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

54/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

ChatGPT-maker braces for copyright fight in court
Matt O'brien
797 words
13 January 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B7
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

A barrage of high-profile lawsuits in a New York federal court will test the future of ChatGPT and other artificial intelligence products that wouldn't be so eloquent had they not
ingested huge troves of copyrighted human works.
But are AI chatbots - in this case, widely commercialized products made by OpenAI and its business partner Microsoft - breaking copyright and fair competition laws? Professional
writers and media outlets will face a difficult fight to win that argument in court.
"I would like to be optimistic on behalf of the authors, but I'm not. I just think they have an uphill battle here," said copyright lawyer Ashima Aggarwal, who used to work for academic
publishing giant John Wiley & Sons.
One lawsuit comes from the New York Times. Another from a group of well-known novelists such as John Grisham, Jodi Picoult and George R.R. Martin. A third from bestselling
nonfiction writers, including an author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning biography on which the hit movie "Oppenheimer" was based.
Each of the lawsuits makes different allegations, but they all centre on the San Francisco-based company OpenAI "building this product on the back of other peoples' intellectual
property," said attorney Justin Nelson, who is representing the nonfiction writers and whose law firm is also representing the Times.
"What OpenAI is saying is that they have a free ride to take anybody else's intellectual property really since the dawn of time, as long as it's been on the internet," Nelson said.
The Times sued in December, arguing that ChatGPT and Microsoft's Copilot are competing with the same outlets they are trained on and diverting web traffic away from the
newspaper and other copyright holders who depend on advertising revenue generated from their content to keep producing their journalism . It also provided evidence of the
chatbots spitting out Times articles word-for-word. At other times the chatbots falsely attributed misinformation to the paper in a way it said damaged its reputation.
One senior federal judge is so far presiding over all three cases, as well as a fourth from two more nonfiction authors who filed another lawsuit last week. U.S. District Judge Sidney H.
Stein has been at the Manhattan-based court since 1995 when he was nominated by then-president Bill Clinton.
OpenAI and Microsoft haven't yet filed formal counter-arguments on the New York cases, but OpenAI made a public statement this week describing the Times lawsuit as "without merit"
and saying that the chatbot's ability to regurgitate some articles verbatim was a "rare bug."
"Training AI models using publicly available internet materials is fair use, as supported by long-standing and widely accepted precedents," said a Monday blog post from the company. It
went on to suggest that the Times "either instructed the model to regurgitate or cherry-picked their examples from many attempts."
OpenAI cited licensing agreements made last year with The Associated Press, the German media company Axel Springer and other organizations as offering a glimpse into how the
company is trying to support a healthy news ecosystem. OpenAI is paying an undisclosed fee to license AP's archive of news stories. The New York Times was engaged in similar
talks before deciding to sue.
OpenAI said earlier this year that access to AP's "high-quality, factual text archive" would improve the capabilities of its AI systems. But its blog post this week downplayed the
importance of news content for AI training, arguing that large language models learn from an "enormous aggregate of human knowledge" and that "any single data source including the New York Times - is not significant for the model's intended learning."
Much of the AI industry's argument rests on the "fair use" doctrine of U.S. copyright law that allows for limited uses of copyrighted materials such as for teaching, research or
transforming the copyrighted work into something different. So far, courts have largely sided with tech companies in interpreting how copyright laws should treat AI systems. In a defeat
for visual artists, a federal judge in San Francisco last year dismissed much of the first big lawsuit against AI image-generators, though allowed some of the case to proceed. Another
California judge shot down comedian Sarah Silverman's arguments that Facebook parent Meta infringed on the text of her memoir to build its AI model.
The Associated Press
Are AI chatbots - in this case, widely commercialized products made by OpenAI and its business partner Microsoft - breaking copyright and fair competition laws? Professional writers and media outlets
will face a difficult fight to win that argument in court. OLIVIER MORIN AFP via GETTY IMAGES file photo
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240113ek1d0003s

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

55/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

opinion/star-columnists

Yuval Noah Harari thinks it's a good thing the world's biggest conflicts are based on fictions
www.thestar.com
1884 words
11 October 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Yuval Noah Harari starts at the beginning. When he wrote his international bestselling and groundbreaking book "Sapiens," he told a "brief history of humankind" from the stone age to
present day." In "Homo Deus," he explored "a brief history of tomorrow" and the effect
of technology on our futures . And in his newest book "Nexus," "a brief history of information networks," he
explores human communication and how, with artificial intelligence and algorithms,
we've now created technology so powerful, it can create the reality we believe.
He put it into immediate context in our interview at the Four Seasons Hotel during a recent visit to Toronto about how those technologies can manipulate the conversation. "If the front
page is a story about immigration or about climate change or about AI, this determines where the conversation goes. You know, look at the US elections. If the main topic people
discuss is immigration, Trump will win. If the main topic people discuss is abortion, Harris will win." We got more deeply into the idea of truth and fiction from there.
Networks are created and held together through fictions
- something you get into very, very early in the book.
The main job of information is to connect a lot of individuals into a network. This can sometimes be done with the truth, but often it's done with fiction. The easiest example comes from
religion, where mythological stories about things that didn't really happen, about entities that don't really exist, are nevertheless very effective in connecting millions and billions of
people. Money is probably the most successful fiction ever created. It has no value in itself. I can take this piece of paper and because we all share the same story, I can give it to a
complete stranger in a store and get, in exchange, an apple that I can eat. This is now the basis for a trade network that connects 8 billion people on the planet.
In a way, the stories that hold networks
- societies, belief systems together are more critical than the scientific facts of physics or biology or history or anything else. We are currently seeing this play out in the headlines in the war between Israel and
Gaza.
If you look at the war in my homeland, between Israelis and Palestinians, it's not about objective facts. Some people think, 'Oh, this is a war about territory, or this is a war about food'.
And this is not the case. There is no objective shortage of land between the Mediterranean and the Jordan River. There is objectively enough land to build houses and schools and
hospitals for everyone. There is no objective shortage of food. If there is not enough food in Gaza, it's not because there is not enough food in the world. They are fighting because of
the stories in their heads. Both sides tell themselves a kind of parallel story that we were given this land by God, and the other side either doesn't exist or has no right to exist here. And
this is why people fight, because of the stories in their heads, not because of the objective facts on the ground.
If it's about the story, how do we change it?
If the conflict was about objective reality, then it has no solution. If objectively there is just not enough land or not enough food, what can you do? You cannot create more land from
nothing. So it's actually good news that the conflict is about these mythologies. Of course, to change a powerful mythology is not easy, but it is possible. It's been done many, many
times in history. The crucial step is to acknowledge there is another people here in this land. They now exist here, and they have a right to exist here. Once you make this mental
change , there are political solutions to the conflict.
Then it would be about framing a dialogue and having a dialogue, which is something that we don't do much anymore. The idea of conversations, speaking with each other, is breaking
down all over the world.
The paradox of our era is that we have the most sophisticated information technology in history, and we can't talk with each other. Democracy is a conversation. For most of history,
large scale democracies were simply impossible. You had small scale democracies like ancient Athens - in a single city, people could come together and talk, but in a big country, it was
impossible. So all big countries were authoritarian. You begin to see large scale democracies only after the rise of, first, newspaper , then radio, television. Then it becomes possible
for millions of people spread over a country as big as Canada to hold a conversation about major issues: peace and war, immigration, human rights. And now we are in the midst of a
major change in information technology, (with) the rise of social media and algorithms and AI. People spend hours every day on social media.
Do you?
I try not to.
The power over these platforms is in the hands of a few individuals like Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg, and of their algorithms. The one key problem is that the social media
companies, their (goal) is to increase user engagement. Who doesn't want to engage? They want it because to engage means that you stay longer on the platform, they sell more
advertisements, they harvest more data they can sell, they make more money. So they gave the algorithms the goal (to) increase user engagement, and the algorithms discovered the
easiest way to grab people's attention, to increase their engagement, is by spreading hate and fear and greed and anger (and) conspiracy theories. This is what they do, and this
destroys the conversation.
Have we abdicated control of our future to
algorithms?
Previously, this role of deciding, of managing the conversation, was in the hands of human editors, like editors of newspapers and TV stations and so forth. And yes, they also wanted
to increase sales of the newspaper , but they're also committed to other values, like the truth. This is why they went to journalism school and developed mechanisms to fact check
and to verify
- to make sure, if I'm going to put this story on the front page of my newspaper , am I really convinced that this is true? Now the social media companies, they are not doing that. We
can simply require them to have the same responsibility, the same liability, as newspaper editors. They constantly defend themselves by talking about freedom of speech. They say
'we don't want to censor the users.' We don't ask them to censor the users. Don't ban anybody. But your algorithms shouldn't recommend to people content that you are not absolutely
sure is true, and if you don't know how to differentiate between reliable and unreliable information, then you're in the wrong business.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

56/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

There's an interesting anecdote about when print first came out, there were two things that were best sellers, so to speak, at the time: religious tracts and conspiracy theories about
witches.
Print contributed, to some extent, of course, to the scientific revolution . It made it easier for people like Copernicus to spread their views. But Copernicus was not the big best seller
in early modern Europe. Print made all kinds of information spread more easily and actually, 200 years passed from Gutenberg's introduction of print to Europe in the mid 15th
century until the flowering of the scientific revolution in the mid 17th century. In between, you had the worst wars of religion in European history and the worst witch hunts. And this
was partly because print made it very easy to spread extremist religious literature and conspiracy theories about witches. So one of the biggest bestsellers of early modern Europe
was this book, "The Hammer of the Witches," which described a worldwide conspiracy of witches led by Satan. And he described how they eat children ...
and how they try to destroy humanity.
Wisdom is being able differentiate between truth and fiction - which we're clearly not always able to do.
I (studied) history for almost 10 years. What do you learn in 10 years? You want to know how many men King William the Conqueror had in the Battle of Hastings. You have one
chronicle that says you had 100,000 men. You have another that says, no, we had 50,000. How do you know which one to believe? You learn that... it's always more reliable to look at
the paymaster records than to look at the chronicles and the propaganda of the time. People study journalism to know how (to) tell the difference between reliable and unreliable
information. And now we have this new era of media companies, because Twitter and Facebook, they are media companies, and they think they don't need these qualifications.
You write that the idea of freedom has been co-opted in many ways and, in fact, feeds many of the conspiracy theories we're seeing right now.
People confuse freedom with complete separation. They think, 'If I depend on a certain institution, it means I'm not free. I don't want to rely on the newspaper editors, I don't want to
rely on the politicians. I don't want to rely on the judges.' But this is a complete fantasy. Nothing in the universe is completely independent. Nothing. For food, we depend on the animals
and the plants and the sun and the rain.
To protect our health, we depend on the healthcare system. You have to trust others. If you are unable to trust anybody, you will not just be miserable. You will be dead.
There's an existential threat here. Are you hopeful for us?
I haven't lost hope. We still have significant power to determine the direction this is going. The AIs, the algorithms, are not yet in control. I think every human has a deep yearning for the
truth. This is why, as individuals, people go to therapy. They want to know the truth about the life, the relationship, but they can't do it by themselves, because it's too painful. It's true
also on the level of entire nations. So we need to resist the cynical view that tells us it's all about power and take better care of the truth and encourage it.
Yuval Noah Harari author of "Nexus A Brief History of Information Networks from the Stone Age to AI" is interviewed in Toronto in September, 2024. Yuval Noah Harari author of "Nexus A Brief History of
Information Networks from the Stone Age to AI" is interviewed in Toronto in September, 2024. Yuval Noah Harari author of "Nexus: A Brief History of Information Networks from the Stone Age to AI" is
interviewed about humanity and AI. Yuval Noah Harari interviewed in Toronto in September, 2024. Yuval Noah Harari author of "Nexus A Brief History of Information Networks from the Stone Age to AI" is
interviewed in Toronto in September, 2024.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241011ekab0008i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

57/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Thomson Reuters races to build AI technology into its data products for professionals; The company’s next major step is to
expand its generative AI assistant, CoCounsel, which perform multistep processes that review conversations, compare and
draft documents and make recommendations
James Bradshaw
1202 words
29 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

When OpenAI released its GTP-3 artificial intelligence model in the summer of 2020, David Wong had just arrived at Thomson Reuters Corp., and it wasn’t long before company
executives were asking internally, “Is this our Kodak moment?”
Thomson Reuters had worked with AI [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] for years, and it was part of the product road map that Mr. Wong was hired to build
as chief product officer. But suddenly, here was a glimpse of a technological leap forward that was potentially so significant it could force companies to adapt – or risk losing relevance
the way once-dominant photography giant Kodak did when it failed to revamp its business model to meet the rise of digital images.
A team at Thomson Reuters tested the new AI language model on a battery of legal research questions to see how it compared to Westlaw, the company’s flagship online research
product for lawyers. Could it reliably answer complex legal questions for customers?
The answer was a resounding no. “It failed miserably, actually, at legal research,” Mr. Wong said in an interview. But when an updated model called GPT-3.5 was released two years
later, and more sophisticated versions started appearing every several months, Thomson Reuters ran the same tests again and again.
“And the F student that we saw in 2020 graduated to a C-minus student with GPT-3.5 and then to a B or B-plus student with GPT-4,” Mr. Wong said. “And then we realized: Oh no, now
we have the moment.”
As the company’s leaders discussed how to respond in the spring of 2023, he said, “we realized at that point that this technology was too powerful not to use.” Mr. Wong predicts that in
three to five years, every professional will have a generative AI assistant.
The speed of development and the level of investment in artificial intelligence have exploded in recent years, with hundreds of billions of dollars pouring into the sector, and trillions
more predicted to follow. That has fuelled an AI mania, mixing hype with anxiety about the many ways the technology may – or may not – transform large swaths of the economy and
the work force.
At Thomson Reuters, there was little debate about the looming impact for its clients. In simple terms, Mr. Wong said, current AI models are particularly good at two things: retrieving
information and producing written work. And the vast majority of Thomson Reuters’s 150-odd products do some combination of those two things.
The company, which owns Reuters News , earns the lion’s share of its US$6.8-billion of annual revenue from three main lines of business that offer software to make sense of vast
troves of information to legal, corporate, as well as tax and accounting professionals. (Woodbridge Co. Ltd., the Thomson family holding company and controlling shareholder of
Thomson Reuters, also owns The Globe and Mail.)
“We basically have search engines on top of databases, and so there was incredible relevance to the offering that we have,” Mr. Wong said. “So that calibrated the speed question.”
Mr. Wong, 40, is a Toronto native and University of Toronto engineering graduate who worked at audience measurement giant Nielsen in New York and at Facebook in the Bay Area
before returning to Canada to join Thomson Reuters. As the company recalibrated its plans to move AI to the core of its products, he had to move fast but be careful not to break things
– especially its clients’ trust.
When Thomson Reuters surveyed legal, tax, risk and compliance professionals, 77 per cent said they expect AI to have a high or transformational impact on their work over the next
five years, eliminating an average of 12 hours of work per week. But professionals still have a “healthy amount of reticence” about charging ahead with AI, the report says. They worry
about accuracy, data security, ethics and disruption of established business models. That is particularly true for law firms, where billable hours pay salaries, and junior lawyers are
typically trained with years of drudge work.
Most of clients of Thomson Reuters have tested AI tools and know they will use them, Mr. Wong said. The pressing questions now are about how to do that safely, to earn a return on
the required investment, and to train staff to use them productively and responsibly.
“We’re seeing a very pragmatic discussion happening right now because people have gotten away from the theoretical,” he said.
Thomson Reuters pledged to spend US$100-million annually to develop its AI capabilities and build them into its products, then quickly increased the budget. “We spent more than that
last year and we’re spending more than that this year,” Mr. Wong said.
As generative AI models took off, Thomson Reuters had just come through a two-year transformation plan that streamlined a web of legacy technology systems, moving more of its
content to the cloud. That made it possible to experiment and test products faster than the company could have even a few years ago, Mr. Wong said.
It took Thomson Reuters about eight weeks last year to build a proof of concept for an AI-assisted research tool for the company’s Westlaw Precision product. “Our very first iterations
were shockingly close to customer acceptance,” he said. Little more than eight months after that work started, the product launched last November.
“There were a lot of steps on the way,” Mr. Wong said. “I couldn’t have told you in February or March of that year that we would ship it in November.”
The company’s next major step is to expand its generative AI assistant, CoCounsel, which perform multistep processes that review conversations, compare and draft documents and
make recommendations. The company released an updated 2.0 version in August that it says is three times faster than a previous version, but it aims to expand it across all of the
sectors it serves, including tax, and enable it to do increasingly complex work that involves more steps and decisions.
Making that tool essential to professionals will be key to Thomson Reuters’ success. With AI-based tools proliferating, already, “we’ve heard a bit of exhaustion,” Mr. Wong said, and
customers are looking to limit the number they deploy to their staff. He thinks Thomson Reuters has a head start in AI-assisted legal research, but for general AI assistants that review
and draft documents or automate work, “it is a much more competitive space.”
“I’m sure there will be dozens of startups and smaller companies out there which will create really compelling, great products for a little narrow use case,” he said. “But the question for
every big firm is going to be, can you give me everything I want?”
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Thomson Reuters races to build AI technology into its data products for professionals
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-thomson-reuters-races-to-build-ai-technology-into-its-data-products/]
The Globe and Mail

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

58/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240929ek9t00105

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

59/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

The rise of AI is showing why financial advisors remain indispensable; AI can’t protect investors from their behavioural
biases
Lisa Kramer
700 words
8 April 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Sign up for the Globe Advisor weekly newsletter for professional financial advisors on our sign-up page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/?
utm_source=Globe%20Advisor&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter&utm_content=2021-1217_7&utm_term=advisor_weekly_cross_promote_advisor_markets&cu_id=6SJND3YLRIZaO5PUPgekOHYjPo35ExpC#globe-advisor-newsletters] . Get exclusive investment industry
news and insights, the week’s top headlines, and what you and your clients need to know. For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
The emergence of artificial intelligence ( AI) tools in the financial arena has been both disruptive and promising. As machine learning , large language models and artificial
neural networks enter the mainstream, a natural question is whether investors using applications built on these technologies might finally be able to avoid costly mistakes that arise
from behavioural biases, perhaps rendering human financial advisors obsolete.
One reason AI-based advice will not dominate advisor guidance is due to the human coder’s imprint on AI tools . Algorithms are created by human programmers, and people cannot
avoid imparting their own biases into the code they write. Whether consciously or unconsciously, programmers make choices about how to design software, how to assess financial
risk, which financial data to select for training computer programs, and how to set automated thresholds for taking specific trading actions. As a result, algorithm-driven investment
decisions inherently include more than a bit of human nature, for better or worse.
Another factor is that the financial data sets upon which algorithms are trained are themselves the outcome of human behaviour, including investors’ bad choices about when to buy or
sell. Human emotions such as greed and fear lead to market bubbles and crashes. Reddit forum participants speculate on meme stocks, creating short squeezes and price surges. AI
tools built on historical market data, with all their sentiment-driven frenzy, may perpetuate such events unwittingly.
Even if we somehow managed to create bias-free algorithms and trained them on market data that had been magically stripped of human fingerprints, investors using the AI would still
occasionally give in to their worst instincts and hit the override button – especially during periods of extreme market volatility, which is when people tend to make their costliest financial
mistakes.
The black-box syndrome poses an additional challenge. AI models can be complex and opaque, and investors tend to dislike receiving recommendations unless they understand the
underlying rationale. Without transparency and context, many investors will not trust advice that emerges from AI.
Of course, there are some limited settings in which AI is being applied successfully to steer investors toward better outcomes. Robo-advisors match clients’ risk preferences with
appropriately designed buy-and-hold portfolios. Some also use algorithms to monitor and rebalance portfolios, ensuring the asset allocation remains appropriate for a given investor
over time.
But more generally, AI is unlikely to shield investors from the massive array of behavioural biases that make us all beautifully, imperfectly human.
The path forward for proactive financial advisors is to continue emphasizing the crucial role they play in mitigating their clients’ biases and to step in where new technology falls short.
While AI can analyze huge volumes of data in virtually no time, it cannot eliminate our human nature, including our inclination toward herd mentality, our irrepressible overconfidence,
our susceptibility to confirmation bias, and our aversion to realizing losses (“If I don’t sell this poorly performing stock and turn my paper loss into an actual loss, then I didn’t make a
bad decision when I originally bought it”).
Advisors can act as a fuse between their clients’ impulses and the resulting decisions. They can tailor advice to clients’ personal values – a moral compass is still beyond the reach of
today’s robots – and they can maintain their clients’ confidence and trust.
Technology simply cannot replace the insights, human touch and expertise advisors provide. Advisors who rise where AI falls short will continue to provide value to their clients
throughout this period of technological change .
Lisa Kramer is a professor of finance at the University of Toronto.
For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: The rise of AI is showing why financial advisors remain indispensable [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globeadvisor/advisor-stocks/article-the-rise-of-ai-is-showing-why-financial-advisors-remain-indispensable/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240408ek48000dx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

60/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

National

Artificial intelligence is already hard at work in many sectors – for good and bad; The widespread use of artificial intelligence
has ushered in a world of contradictions
Irene Galea
877 words
8 October 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The widespread use of artificial intelligence has ushered in a world of contradictions: scientific revolutions tempered with ethical concerns, creative power devaluing human-made
creation, companies finding advantage while cutting jobs. In many sectors, AI is already hard at work – for better or worse.
Employment
As with the introduction of many new technologies, AI will create new jobs requiring new skills. AI applications promise to help workers dispense with mundane tasks, and hopeful
assessments suggest AI could leave workers to focus on other elements of their jobs that can’t be automatically generated. (This is despite some studies saying that AI has actually
added [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/careers/article-ai-is-actually-increasing-our-workload/] to employees’ workloads.)
That efficiency and improved accuracy can reduce risk for companies, said Chloe Allen, a strategist at Toronto-based business consultancy Impro.AI. “Small mistakes that may have
derailed a project or initiative in the past can be avoided,” she said.
AI’s ability to destabilize knowledge work has been the subject of intense discussion. But it will likely also build on the impact that automation has already had on the work force in
recent decades, leaving many out of work in industries such as manufacturing, logistics and customer service. Such a change would leave many low-skilled workers out of a job,
further increasing economic inequality.
Meanwhile, much of the promised rewards of generative AI have yet to materialize, making the bet a costly one. Goldman Sachs pegged the spending
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/editorials/article-the-magic-act-of-generative-ai-is-fading-fast/] in coming years on generative AI alone at more than US$1-trillion – and said
that so far, only those providing the infrastructure are yet making a profit.
Security
AI dually affects security and safety both online and in the real world.
Controversially, AI is being used by militaries to operate and target unmanned weapons systems, in predictive policing to identify crime hot spots, and in facial recognition by
governments and corporate entities. Canada, too, is working toward making its armed forces “AI-enabled” [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-canada-is-working-onincorporating-ai-in-its-military-blair-says/] by 2030. Over all, these systems risk infringing on personal rights and falling victim to biases built into the data sets they were trained on.
And AI is now used in pro-active cybersecurity to identify and correct vulnerabilities more quickly, searching for anomalies to spot security threats faster than a human could. But at the
same time, AI has enhanced threat actors’ capabilities by scaling attacks, from phishing to ransomware, said Neil Desai, senior fellow, Centre for International Governance Innovation,
and entrepreneur-in-residence with the Rogers Cyber Catalyst.
AI-powered cybersecurity threats extend to the real world, for instance, by putting hospitals and infrastructure, and therefore lives, at risk.
“Because of AI, you can now instantly attack people around the world with the push of a button,” Mr. Desai said. “Ultimately, AI enables the threat actor faster than it enables those
trying to secure the vulnerable.”
Environment
The use of AI could help address environmental challenges, but could also add to them.
AI can analyze data to reduce energy use in buildings, predict future energy demand, help experts model future climate patterns, and monitor conservation efforts. And AI could help
farmers better allocate water and use harmful pesticides more judiciously, as well as autonomously operate machinery.
“Scaled up, AI-driven agriculture could reduce agriculture’s environmental footprint, which is significant,” said Kelly Bronson, Canada Research Chair in Science and Society at the
University of Ottawa.
But training and running AI models require significant computational power, which requires vast quantities of electricity [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-electricitywater-environment-climate-change/] to run and fresh water for cooling, exacerbating the planet’s existing shortages and adding pressure to energy grids. One study pegs the 2027
emissions from Nvidia Corp.’s servers alone as equivalent to the annual use of the province of Ontario. Meanwhile, AI data centres depend on physical equipment, which will eventually
add to landfills.
Media
AI is shaping the way we consume content.
AI has made possible a range of creative tools with applications across sectors, from personalized education to immersive video games. While it can be used to assist in artistic
production, it has already been used to flood the internet with poor-quality, copyright-violating content and inauthentic AI-generated images and video.
It has changed the landscape for journalism and news consumption. AI news gathering allows journalists to process vast amounts of data quickly and uncover stories that might
otherwise remain hidden, said Natalie Turvey, president and executive director of the Canadian Journalism Foundation. It can also help news organizations large and small reach
audiences more effectively.
However, the rise of AI also poses risks to the integrity of journalism and the way it is understood. When used to further fuel existing algorithms that shape the news content that
readers discover, AI could deepen societal divides and degrade trust in reliable sources.
The ease with which AI can generate convincing misinformation threatens to flood our information ecosystem with falsehoods, Ms. Turvey said. “This makes news literacy more crucial
than ever.”
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Artificial intelligence is already hard at work in many sectors – for good and bad
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-artificial-intelligence-is-already-hard-at-work-in-many-sectors-for/]
The Globe and Mail

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

61/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241009eka80002t

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

62/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

MacIntyre named as Star's editor-in-chief; Anne Marie Owens says the time is right to step down after leading newsroom
since April 2021
Francine Kopun
973 words
11 June 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A2
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Nicole MacIntyre, a veteran Canadian journalist who has risen through the ranks of leading national and metropolitan newspapers over a 22-year career, has been appointed editorin-chief of the Toronto Star, effective July 11.
"The Toronto Star is where I fell in love with reporting more than two decades ago," said MacIntyre, 44, a former Star intern who was hired from the Globe and Mail in 2021 to be the
Star's managing editor of news .
She was appointed deputy editor in 2023.
"I'm humbled by the opportunity to lead this incredibly talented newsroom and build on the Star's legacy of producing ambitious, indispensable journalism ."
MacIntyre replaces Anne Marie Owens, who was appointed editor-in-chief in April 2021, at a time when the world was mired in a pandemic and the Star was grappling with turbulence
in the industry and changes in the structure of the organization itself, after it was purchased by private investors in 2020.
"My priorities when I started were to elevate our journalism , push digital transformation and create a cohesive, engaged newsroom," Owens wrote in a letter shared with staff.
"One of the reasons I feel so confident stepping away now is that we've hit the mark on all those priorities, and, in building a strong leadership team, have the very best leader to take
the Star into the future ."
Toronto Star owner and publisher Jordan Bitove said Owens arrived during a difficult time in the world and at the paper and performed remarkably, helping transform the Star from a
print organization into a digital one.
Under her leadership, the Star newsroom was fundamentally restructured to respond more nimbly to news online, while also providing readers with award-winning writing,
investigative journalism and digital design. She brought more and better data analytics to bear on the Star's content strategy, and augmented and improved digital storytelling
practices.
"She reorganized our newsroom, she got into new areas, like podcasts and videos, she brought a steady hand and guidance. She brought a level of confidence, maturity and
understanding," Bitove said.
Owens, 61, said she came to the position of editor-in-chief with a deadline of three years in mind, after having served five years as editor-in-chief at the National Post during challenging
times.
She also served as deputy editor at Maclean's magazine from 2011 to 2014. She began her career as a reporter at the St. Catharines Standard, becoming a columnist before joining
the National Post as a reporter in 1998.
After 36 years in journalism , Owens said the time is right for her to step away. Her four boys, including a set of triplets, are wrapping up university degrees and her husband is retired.
"I would like to slow down a bit, but I'd like to think about how I can take some of the things I've learned about leadership and journalism and find meaningful ways to share that with
people. I am still working on what the focus will be of this next decade," Owens said.
Both Owens and MacIntyre agree that one of the biggest challenges facing the news industry today is continuing to build trust with readers in a climate of misinformation and news
apathy.
"Many people have described artificial intelligence as an existential threat to journalism , and I think that is true," said MacIntyre.
"We need to reap the benefits of technology, but I think we have to be cautious. We're in a dangerous era right now of rising misinformation and distrust in institutions, including media.
Protecting and in some cases restoring public trust is going to be critical for our survival."
MacIntyre said she has been inspired in her career by women in leadership roles, including Mary Deanne Shears, who became the Star's first female managing editor in 1997 and ran
the newsroom during MacIntyre's internship.
"She was smart, she was fierce and the newsroom respected her," said MacIntyre, adding that one of the reasons she joined the Star in 2021 was to work with Owens, who is highly
regarded in the industry.
"Anne Marie was one of the only leaders I knew at the highest level who was also a mom," MacIntyre said.
"She was the editor-in-chief for the National Post, raising four teenage boys. That was a superhuman feat."
MacIntyre lives in the east end of Toronto with her two children, ages 12 and 14. She grew up in New Minas, N.S., the only child of a single mother.
Her grandfather was a volunteer firefighter and as a child, MacIntyre used to listen to the emergency dispatch scanner, dreaming of being a crime reporter at a major metropolitan
newspaper .
MacIntyre has worked as a reporter at the London Free Press, Waterloo Region Record and the Hamilton Spectator. She was hired by the Globe and Mail as Toronto editor in 2015,
rising to deputy national editor in 2017.
"I want the Star to be essential for everyone in this city who is invested in Toronto's future , and in the country," said MacIntyre, adding that she'd also like the newspaper to better
reflect the struggles and successes of people living in the city.
Bitove said MacIntyre has great gut instinct for what Star readers want, deep integrity and sound judgment.
"She wants to make the city better and she wants to do it through the tradition of great journalism ," said Bitove.
"I see Nicole as a transformative leader."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

63/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Nicole MacIntyre, left, has been promoted to editor-in-chief as Anne Marie Owens, right, steps down after more than three years leading the Toronto Star newsroom.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240611ek6b00069

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

64/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Insight

Google deal leaves some journalists disappointed; Tech giant 'got off easy' in agreement to provide funding
Trân Nguyen
814 words
1 September 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
IN8
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

SACRAMENTO, Calif. -- Google will soon give California millions of dollars to help pay for local journalism jobs in a first-in-the-nation deal, but journalists and other media industry
experts are calling it a disappointing agreement that mostly benefits the tech giant.
The agreement, which was hashed out behind closed doors and announced in August, will direct tens of millions of public and private dollars to keep local news organizations afloat.
Critics say it's a textbook political manoeuvre by tech giants to avoid a fee under what could have been groundbreaking legislation. California lawmakers agreed to kill a bill requiring
tech to support news outlets they profit from in exchange for Google's financial commitment.
By shelving the bill, the state effectively gave up on an avenue that could have required Google and social media platforms to make ongoing payments to publishers for linking news
content, said Victor Pickard, professor of media policy and political economy at the University of Pennsylvania. California also left behind a much bigger amount of funding that could
have been secured under the legislation, he said.
"Google got off easy," Pickard said.
Google said the deal will help both journalism and the artificial intelligence sector in California.
"This public-private partnership builds on our long history of working with journalism and the local news ecosystem in our home state, while developing a national centre of
excellence on AI policy," Kent Walker, president of global affairs and chief legal officer for Google's parent company Alphabet, said in a statement.
State governments across the U.S. have been working to help boost struggling news organizations. The U.S. newspaper industry has been in a long decline, with traditional business
models collapsing and advertising revenues drying up in the digital era.
As news organizations move from primarily print to mostly digital, they have increasingly relied on Google and Facebook to distribute its content. While publishers saw their
advertising revenues nosedive significantly in the last few decades, Google's search engine has become the hub of a digital advertisement empire that generates more than $200
billion (U.S.) annually.
Here's a closer look into the deal California made with Google this week:
What does the deal entail?
The deal, totalling $250 million, will provide money to two efforts: funding for journalism initiatives and a new AI research program. The agreement only guarantees funding for a
period of five years.
Roughly $110 million will come from Google and $70 million from the state budget to boost journalism jobs. The fund will be managed by UC Berkeley's Graduate School of
Journalism . Google will also kick in $70 million to fund the AI research program, which would build tools to help solve "real world problems," said Assemblymember Buffy Wicks, who
brokered the deal.
The deal is not a tax, which is a stark departure from a bill Wicks authored that would have imposed a "link tax" requiring companies like Google, Facebook and Microsoft to pay a
certain percentage of advertising revenue to media companies for linking to their content. The bill was modelled after a policy passed in Canada that requires Google to pay roughly
$74 million per year to fund journalism .
Why are tech companies
agreeing to this now?
Tech companies spent the last two years fighting Wicks' bill, launching expensive opposition campaigns and running ads attacking the legislation. Google threatened in April to
temporarily block news websites from some California users' search results. The bill had continued to advance with bipartisan support - until this week.
Wicks told The Associated Press on Thursday she saw no path forward for her bill and that the funding secured through the deal "is better than zero."
"This represents politics is the art of the possible," she said.
Why do journalists and labour
unions oppose the agreement?
The Media Guild of the West, a union representing journalists in Southern California, Arizona and Texas, said journalists were locked out of the conversation. The union was a
champion of Wicks' bill but wasn't included in the negotiations with Google.
"The future of journalism should not be decided in backroom deals," a letter by the union sent to lawmakers reads. "The Legislature embarked on an effort to regulate monopolies
and failed terribly. Now we question whether the state has done more harm than good."
The agreement results in a much smaller amount of funding compared to what Google gives to newsrooms in Canada and goes against the goal to rebalance Google's dominance over
local news organizations, according to a letter from the union to Wicks earlier this week.
The deal has the support of some journalism groups, including California News Publishers Association, Local Independent Online News Publishers and California Black Media.
The Associated Press
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240901ek910005v

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

65/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

The coming AI wave is more like a tsunami
By KELLY CRYDERMAN

839 words
16 February 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A11
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The use of artificial intelligence is surging, and it's unclear how much governments can control it
No matter the outcome of the U.S. presidential election, 2024 is likely to mark a new low in political messaging thanks to now-booming generative artificial intelligence technologies.
Chicanery has always been part of politics but never has it had this sophistication or reach. Already, AI has been used to mimic incumbent Joe Biden's voice to try to suppress primary
voting. As the months go by, experts are voicing concern Americans will see and hear swarms of plausible things that haven't actually happened.
Think: convincing fake or altered videos of a downtown riot or an oil spill, a frail Mr. Biden stumbling badly at a campaign stop, or Donald Trump's physical features altered just slightly
to look villainous.
It will all be done to reinforce pre-existing political narratives, or to feed into disinformation campaigns.
“I expect a tsunami," Oren Etzioni, professor emeritus at the University of Washington, told the Associated Press. “I hope to be proven wrong. But the ingredients are there, and I am
completely terrified."
Terrified is also what one might feel after listening to some of the witnesses at the Standing Committee on Industry and Technology, which is examining Canada's first-ever legislation
on artificial intelligence .
Creating a law on AI appears an almost impossible task. AI has the power to transform society, politics and biology. It is already far smarter and cheaper than researchers predicted a
couple of years ago. As both big corporations and individuals harness AI, with various motives, it's unclear how much governments will be able to control what happens next.
Even still, it's hard to overstate how crucial it is that Canada build some kind of coherent framework. “Canada is not a big power like China, the U.S. and the EU, of course, but it could
– and should – be a contributive player to ensure responsible AI at a global scale," said Catherine Régis, a law professor at the University of Montreal and a leading voice on AI. The
country boasts a large number of leaders in the field, and the country wants to be a part of the global billions of dollars being invested.
At the committee stage, a key question MPs and witnesses have debated is whether it's best to try to iron out all the flaws of its artificial intelligence legislation, Bill C-27, or pass
something quickly with flexibility in regulations that can be changed as technology evolves. Industry Minister François-Philippe Champagne has said failing to act now would mean AI
systems already being used across many sectors would remain unregulated for several more years. “Once AI technology already permeates our society, it will be difficult to change
expectations or retrospectively address harms."
You don't have to look as far as cyberattacks, novel bioweapons or a Terminator-like scenario – or even the future loss of human jobs to AI – to be worried about harms. In the near
term, it's the ability to create convincing images and sounds that will be the most damaging. And it's not only those in the stratosphere of fame held by presidential candidates, or Taylor
Swift (whose likeness was used to create AI-generated porn last month) who will have to face the fakes.
The standing committee heard, for instance, about a young Canadian actor, a minor, whose voice was uploaded to a site that allows users to manipulate it to say “crude, R-rated
things," said Eleanor Noble, the national president of the performers' union ACTRA.
At the same time, the positives of AI – including advances in medical treatment, and the better management of complicated agriculture and energy systems – are ever-present, too. The
wealth and productivity it will create for some is tantalizing. Generative AI semiconductor chip producer Nvidia Corp. – not a household name, yet – is challenging both Google-parent
Alphabet and Amazon to be the most valuable U.S. company in existence.
At the committee meeting, Canadian executives from Meta, Google and Amazon expressed concern that Bill C-27 as it stands could be too restrictive, and say the country risks falling
behind others.
But in the race for command of AI, many experts are urging caution and constraint, including Yoshua Bengio, a world-leading AI researcher. The University of Montreal professor said
even he only truly grasped the magnitude of the risks of “unbridled advances in AI" – ones that now keep him awake at night – after studying the proficiency of ChatGPT last year.
When he appeared at the standing committee this month, Dr. Bengio was clear he believes some guardrails are better than nothing at all. “The current AI trajectory poses serious risks
of major societal harms."
AI will be a problem for the U.S.
during this high-stakes election year. But soon, any day now, this will be a problem for us all.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240216ek2g0000i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

66/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both
directions
David Leeder
3039 words
30 October 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Air Canada ( AC-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AC-T/] ) were flat after it said on Wednesday it would increase direct flights between Canada
and China, which remain below pre-COVID levels even though the carrier has added capacity to other Asia Pacific routes.
Canada’s largest carrier said in a statement it will be resuming daily service from Vancouver to Beijing on January 15 and will be increasing its Shanghai flights to daily starting on
December 7.
The news arm of China’s aviation regulator said earlier that the move came after Ottawa last week removed a 2022 limit on how many services Chinese carriers could fly to Canada.
CAAC News , the official newspaper of the Civil Aviation Administration of China, said the increased flights between China and Canada would bolster trade and their economies and
promote further recovery of China-Canada air transport. A Canadian source confirmed the development to Reuters.
Canada agreed to stabilise ties with China in July, committing to “pragmatic” engagement with the world’s second-largest economy, even as trade remained a point of bilateral friction.
Flights between both Canada and the United States and China have not ramped back up after COVID-era travel restrictions ended, even as airlines add more seats to other
destinations in Asia Pacific. Air Canada, which reports earnings on Friday, said earlier this year the carrier expects stronger demand for Pacific routes in the back half of 2024.
Chinese airlines are accelerating applications for additional flights, the CAAC article added.
However, in the United States, major U.S. passenger airlines have put off resuming some flights to China, citing lagging travel demand between the world’s two largest economies.
In 2019 Air Canada was flying up to 35 times a week to China - including from Toronto - while Chinese carriers operated 76 direct round-trip flights, Cirium flight schedule data shows.
These restrictions were lifted on Friday, a Canadian Transportation Agency order said.
Calgary-based Precision Drilling Corp. ( PD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PD-T/] ) was higher after saying it earned $39-million in the third quarter of
2024, nearly double what it earned in the same time period last year.
Canada’s largest oil-and-gas drilling rig company says the profit works out to $2.77 per share, compared to the $20-million profit, or $1.45 per share, it earned in the third quarter of
2023.
Precision Drilling says its revenue was $477-million, up from $447-million in the prior year’s quarter, as drilling activity increased in Canada and internationally and more than offset
lower activity in the U.S.
The company says in Canada, its customers’ drilling activity increased 25 per cent year-over-year, averaging 72 active drilling rigs in the third quarter of 2024.
In the U.S., the company saw activity decline to 35 drilling rigs on average during the quarter, compared with 41 in the same period last year.
Precision Drilling says it expects stronger demand for drilling rigs in Canada through 2025, thanks to the additional oil-and-gas export capacity created by the Trans Mountain pipeline
expansion and the upcoming start-up of liquefied natural gas export facility LNG Canada.
In a research note, Raymond James analyst Michael Barth said: “3Q24 is yet another quarter with strong FCF generation, disciplined capital allocation, and a constructive outlook for
aggregate activity and day rates. This should be received positively.:
Google parent Alphabet ( GOOGL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q/] ) said late Tuesday its AI investments were “paying off” as it reported a
35-per-cent surge in its cloud business and U.S. election-related spending lifted YouTube ad sales in the third quarter.
Alphabet shares rose on Wednesday. Shares of Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q/] ) and Microsoft ( MSFT-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q/] ), the top cloud companies, were also up.
Alphabet topped third-quarter revenue and earnings expectations . Its mainstay Search business jumped 12 per cent and as did revenue from YouTube ads.
“Alphabet is the first major tech name to report earnings, and it hasn’t disappointed,” said Matt Britzman, senior equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “Cloud growth was strong ...
which continues to support the argument that the major cloud providers are well-placed to benefit from the AI revolution .”
Perceived as slow to catch up with Big Tech rival Microsoft in the AI race, Google has been beefing up its Gemini AI chatbot and improving its AI-powered Search.
The company is continuing to spend big on AI.
Its new chief financial officer, Anat Ashkenazi, fielding her first analyst call, said Alphabet’s capital expenditures in 2025 would be higher than this year.
In the third quarter, Alphabet’s capex rose 62 per cent to US$13-billion. The fourth quarter is expected to be similar, she said.
Some analysts said Alphabet’s quarter looked impressive compared with low expectations , and that its small but growing cloud business could slowly fill in for its slowing ad business.
Google’s long-established dominance of the digital ad market is under threat from Amazon and TikTok, which have become popular with advertisers looking to tap a ready pool of
buyers. Its Search business is also facing scrutiny from regulators seeking to break up the company.
But its cloud business grew at the fastest pace in eight quarters - to US$11.35-billion - thanks to enterprises doubling down on cloud spending, which is essential to power artificialintelligence technologies. Analysts estimated $10.86 billion.
“I do think it was an impressive quarter because the fact that Google Cloud could more than offset Search decline speaks both to the growing importance of cloud revenues and the fact
that the company continues to diversify its revenue base,” said Bob O’Donnell, president of TECHnalysis Research.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

67/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Alphabet also beat profit expectations with earnings of US$2.12 per share, compared with an average market estimate of US$1.85, according to LSEG.
“We had a slight tailwind from election-related ad spend in the third quarter, which was a little bit more pronounced in YouTube ads,” Google’s chief business officer, Philipp Schindler,
said on a post-earnings call.
Reddit ( RDDT-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/RDDT/] ) reported its first quarterly profit and forecast fourth-quarter revenue above estimates, helped by
its AI content licensing deals and strong digital advertising spending, sending its shares soaring.
Reddit’s results, its third after going public in March, stoke confidence that more advertisers are turning to the platform, driven by initiatives including translation into other languages by
using machine learning to tap new users.
In 2025, the company will be modernizing its search products with improved results page, autocomplete features and integration of large language models to make search results
better, CEO Steve Huffman said on a post-earnings call.
The company’s content licensing deals with Alphabet’s Google and Microsoft-backed OpenAI for training their AI models have also been boosting its revenue, analysts have said.
“Reddit’s AI partnerships with Google and OpenAI are a huge bonus right now, and while they contributed a good deal to this quarter’s revenue, they’re like training wheels on a bike —
good for stability, but they won’t fuel long-term growth,” said Jeremy Goldman, senior director of briefings at Emarketer.
Reddit expects fourth-quarter revenue to be between US$385-million and US$400-million, compared with analysts’ average estimate of $357.9 million, according to data compiled by
LSEG.
The company reported a profit per share of 16 US cents for the third quarter, compared with a loss of 13 US cents a year earlier. Analysts, on average, had expected a loss of 7 US
cents per share.
Revenue rose 68 per cent to US$348.4-million in the quarter, beating analysts’ estimate of US$312.8-million.
The company’s daily active unique visitors increased 47 per cent to 97.2 million in the third quarter ended Sept. 30, while its global average revenue per user (ARPU) increased 14 per
cent to $3.58.
Visa ( V-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/V-N] ) beat Wall Street expectations for fourth-quarter profit on Tuesday, as consumers set aside worries of a
slowing economy and swiped their cards to splurge on travel and dining out, sending its shares up.
U.S. consumer spending has remained largely resilient despite elevated interest rates, with analysts expecting a soft landing for the economy to boost confidence and reignite spending
growth.
Payments volume rose 8 per cent in the quarter on a constant-dollar basis, while cross-border volume excluding intra-Europe, a gauge of international travel demand, surged 13 per
cent.
Visa Chief Financial Officer Chris Suh on a call with analysts said consumer spending across all segments has remained relatively stable, compared with the third quarter.
“The underlying drivers have remained quite stable,” Mr. Suh told Reuters, adding that he expected consumer resilience to extend into 2025.
However, Asia-Pacific payments volume growth remained below expectations due to the current economic environment, primarily in China, which has been grappling with weak
business sentiment and a prolonged property crisis.
Visa forecast adjusted net revenue growth for 2025 in high single digits to low double digits. That compares with Wall Street expectations of 10.8-per-cent growth, according to data
compiled by LSEG.
It expects adjusted profit per share growth to be at the high end of low double digits, compared with expectations of 11.7-per-cent growth.
On an adjusted basis, Visa earned US$2.71 per share, beating expectations of US$2.58.
Visa’s shares have gained 8.3 per cent in 2024, trailing the 22-per-cent jump in the benchmark S&P 500 index.
On the decline
Brookfield Asset Management ( BAM-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BAM-t] ) was lower after announcing Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF)
will be an anchor investor in its new US$2-billion Middle East-focused private fund.
A non-binding agreement for the PIF to back the new Middle East fund was signed with the Canadian asset management firm at the kingdom’s flagship investment summit taking place
in Riyadh.
At least half of the capital is to be invested in Saudi Arabia and in international companies that are looking to expand in the kingdom, the companies said in a joint statement.
The investment platform, known as Brookfield Middle East Partners (BMEP), will target US$2-billion from a range of investors and intends to focus on buyouts and structured solutions,
among other investment opportunities in the region.
The statement did not say how much the PIF would invest.
Gibson Energy Inc. ( GEI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GEI-T/] ) slid after revealing third-quarter results that fell short of the Street’s expectations as
its contributions from its Marketing business weighed.
The Calgary-based company reported adjusted EBITDA of $151-million, missing the consensus forecast by 5 per cent ($158-milion) as Marketing of $14-million was 25 per cent (or $5million) short of projections and also lower than its own guidance (”at or slightly below $20-milion”). That gap was due to weaker contributions from both Refined Products and Crude
Marketing.
“Despite the modest headline Adj. EBITDA miss (which was largely driven by Marketing), our take is that this was a fairly neutral quarter,” said Raymond James analyst Michael Barth.
Advanced Micro Devices ( AMD-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMD-Q] ) shares fell on Wednesday after the chip company’s revenue forecast failed to
impress investors looking for a bigger windfall from the AI boom.
AMD could lose around US$20-billion in market value, based on premarket movements. The company has been one of the biggest winners of the chip demand boom sparked by the
rise of generative AI , with its shares up nearly 156 per cent since end-2022.
Its soft quarterly revenue forecast and a US$5-billion AI chip sales target for 2025, however, showed that demand for the processors was rising faster than their production, with CEO
Lisa Su saying chip supplies will be tight going into next year.
“It is probably unpalatable for an ‘AI name’ to even guide inline, let alone below,” Bernstein analyst Stacy Rasgon said.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

68/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

“At this point AI performance, while not bad in the objective sense, appears unlikely to drive upside to current expectations , and talk of 2025 ‘lumpiness’ in the business will probably
increase risk (or at least raise some eyebrows).”
Other chip firms such as Arm ( ARM-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ARM-Q] ) and Qualcomm ( QCOM-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/qcom-Q] ) also fell. But AI chip leader Nvidia ( NVDA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/nvdaQ] ) was narrowly lower in a sign that investors did not expect a similar supply shortage impact on the company.
Both Nvidia and AMD rely on chip-making giant TSMC to manufacture their advanced AI chips, but analysts have so far shown little concern about Nvidia’s AI chip supply.
“AI still dominates this (AMD) story, and while the company did raise (sales expectations ) every quarter this year, the concern from here is that AMD won’t be able to provide upside to
Street estimates that are already $8 billion-$9 billion for calendar 2025,” Jefferies analysts said.
At least 10 analysts lowered their target price on the AMD stock, while 8 raised their views, moving the median to US$187.50, according to LSEG data. That represents an upside of
nearly 13 per cent to the company’s last closing price.
AMD trades at nearly 32 times its 12-month forward earnings estimates, compared with 36 times for Nvidia.
Caterpillar ( CAT-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CAT-N/] ) expects 2024 revenue to be below its forecast from August, when it had said that full-year
revenue will be “slightly lower” than 2023, sending the company’s shares down on Wednesday.
Construction equipment makers had got a boost from a surge in post-pandemic demand for equipment, helped in part by U.S. President Joe Biden’s 2021 infrastructure law, a US$1trillion enactment aimed at upgrading roads, bridges and other transport infrastructure.
However, the initial boom in demand from government infrastructure projects has slowed down.
Caterpillar said it now expects annual revenue to be slightly lower than its prior forecast. The company, however, maintained its adjusted operating profit margin and adjusted profit per
share expectations for the full year, as price hikes offset some impact from a sales slowdown.
Concerns about persistent inflation and declining farm incomes have resulted in U.S. machinery makers moderating product stocking as dealers try to cut inventory levels, while high
manufacturing costs have also dented profits.
Caterpillar said on Wednesday that dealers moderated purchases during the third quarter compared to last year.
Caterpillar reported a sales drop in two of its three biggest businesses that cater to construction and resources industries due to lower sales in North America, its biggest market.
Caterpillar’s adjusted operating profit margin came in at 20 per cent for the quarter, compared with 20.8 per cent a year earlier.
On an adjusted basis, the company’s profit decreased to US$5.17 per share in the third quarter, missing the average analyst estimate of US$5.34, according to data compiled by
LSEG.
“ Expectations were fairly muted coming into the quarter, but the magnitude of the miss and an increase in dealer inventories were both worse than expected,” Citi analyst Kyle
Menges said.
Eli Lilly ( LLY-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/LLY-N/] ) fell short of Wall Street sales estimates for its weight-loss and diabetes drugs on Wednesday, hit
by a decrease in U.S. wholesale inventory and sending its shares falling.
U.S. sales of Mounjaro and Zepbound decreased by mid-single digits due to the inventory changes , the company said.
The company delayed plans to advertise weight-loss drug Zepbound and held back on international launches to focus on increasing inventory levels in the U.S., CEO David Ricks told
CNBC.
“There is an excess supply...but we haven’t been stimulating demand the way we had originally planned,” Ricks said.
Lilly’s shares are up 55 per cent so far this year and it has become the most valuable healthcare company in the world, as investors bet on the success of the weight-loss drug.
Quarterly sales of diabetes treatment Mounjaro came in at US$3.11-billion, while those of Zepbound were US$1.26-billion, which Lilly said reflected continued strong demand.
Lilly has invested billions of dollars to expand production of Mounjaro and Zepbound, both known chemically as tirzepatide, including about US$7-billion in its Indiana site and facilities
in Ireland. The drug is sold under the brand name Mounjaro for both diabetes and weight-loss outside of the U.S.
Analysts had on average predicted sales of US$4.20-billion for Mounjaro and US$1.69-billion for Zepbound for the quarter. They expect the drugs to make a combined US$19-billion
this year.
Lilly also trimmed the upper end of its full-year sales forecast by US$600-million to US$46-billion. It maintained the lower end at US$45.4-billion.
It also cut its annual adjusted profit forecast to US$13.02 to US$13.52 per share, compared to prior expectations of US$16.10 to IS$16.60, citing acquisition charges in the third
quarter.
Super Micro Computer ( SMCI-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SMCI-Q/] ) shares slumped on Wednesday after it said Ernst & Young had resigned as its
public accounting firm, over a month after Hindenburg Research alleged “accounting manipulation” at the AI server maker.
The company said EY in late July communicated to Super Micro’s auditing committee several matters relating to transparency and completeness of communications with the
accounting firm.
It has begun the process of identifying a new independent registered public accounting firm.
The accounting firm’s resignation is the latest of Super Micro’s woes.
A day after short-seller Hindenburg’s report, the company delayed the filing of its annual report, citing a need to assess “its internal controls over financial reporting.”
In late September, the Wall Street Journal reported that the U.S. Department of Justice was investigating the company.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-wednesday-october-30-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241030ekau001rx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

69/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Thomson Reuters staying true to its people
Jared Lindzon
1669 words
28 December 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

In Paul Julius Reuter's day, it was carrier pigeons and telegraph cables. In Roy Thomson's age, it was radio stations and newspapers . In Steve Hasker's era, the CEO of Thomson
Reuters is using artificial intelligence to deliver news and information.
The Australian native never intended to work in digital media but says he fell into the field by following the colleagues he most enjoyed working with. "It was in some ways accidental,"
he says. "I liked the people I was working with, and they seemed to be able to tolerate me, so I ended up doing project after project in that space and developed some expertise."
After serving as global president for audience intelligence provider Nielsen and following brief stints as CEO of the Creative Artists Agency and a senior adviser at American private
equity firm TPG, Hasker took over as president and CEO of Thomson Reuters in 2020.
The company - which was created through the acquisition of 175-year-old U.K.-based Reuters by 90-year-old Toronto-based Thomson Corporation in 2008 - is now an $8-billion
business, with 27,000 employees in 70 countries, including 1,200 in Canada.
The corner of the brand most are familiar with, its news division, is in fact one of its smaller entities, according to Hasker. Thomson Reuters also provides content for 600,000
customers in the legal, tax, accounting, audit, risk and compliance fields, and was among the earliest adopters of AI.
"In the early 1990s we put a functioning search algorithm on the front of (legal research platform) Westlaw," he says.
"In other words, we were in the AI business before Google was commercialized."
Now the company is writing its next chapter from the Thomson Reuters technology centre in downtown Toronto, where a team of data scientists, software engineers and developers are
collaborating on its latest AI-driven products and solutions.
The Star spoke with Hasker from the new innovation hub about Canada's role in the development of AI, how the technology will impact professionals in the near future , and how
Thomson Reuters has stayed true to its founding mission.
What was your first experience working on this side of the world?
After I graduated from the University of Melbourne in 1990, I went to work at PwC for four-and-a-half years, and then I ended up getting into Columbia in 1995, but I will confess I only
ended up there because I got accepted, and because I got some financial support from the university.
I did a combined international affairs and MBA degree; I had two Nobel Prize-winning professors, I did internships in St. Petersburg and what was then the world's largest copper mine
in Salt Lake City, Utah, and I loved every minute of it.
When did you
pivot into digital media?
I started working at McKinsey in 1998 doing work in basic materials, metals and mining, some work in New Zealand in the dairy industry and in financial services in the U.K. Then I
found my way back to New York where I was thrown into the telecom, high-tech, and media practices, and ended up sticking there.
Why did you stay?
I liked the people I was working with, and they seemed to be able to tolerate me, so I ended up doing project after project in that space and developed some expertise.
I give young people trying to navigate their careers one piece of advice, which is "just follow great people." Instead of trying to pick an industry, company, role, title, or even the pay
packet, if you find yourself working with people who care about you - and not just based on what you can do for them - stick with them, because they'll help you grow and learn when
you inevitably make mistakes.
Why did you leave
McKinsey in 2009?
There was an assumption that I would stay forever, but I was approached by a guy named Dave Calhoun - who recently stepped down as the CEO of Boeing - to join him at Nielsen.
He said, "you've been in consulting a long time, you probably think you know how to run a business. Trust me, few consultants do, but I'll teach you."
Dave worked at General Electric under Jack Welch for 27 years, and I figured if I'm going to learn how to do this, who better to learn it from? So I went to Nielsen and ended up staying
there for eight years.
Why do you believe you
were picked as CEO of
Thomson Reuters?
I talked to my predecessor about this. He started his career as a journalist , and I think the board wanted more of a technology focus going forward to move from being a content
company to a content-driven technology company.
What was it like joining
in March of 2020?
My first day was March 15, and my first conversation with the senior team was at 9 a.m. on a Sunday about whether we should ask our 26,000 employees to work from home. I didn't
have the information necessary to make that decision, but even if I did, none of us had faced a pandemic before, so nobody knew how to navigate it.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

70/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Then I remembered a quote from a famous professional sporting coach in Australia, Craig Bellamy, who said, "the bigger the game, the simpler the game plan." I remember thinking
we're an IP-driven company, the IP exists in the minds of our people, and the only thing that matters is the health and safety of our people.
So, we decided to ask everyone to work from home, and the business thrived. We were able to find new ways to do things, to innovate, to support people, and I think we came out of
the pandemic a lot stronger.
What ties the many pieces
of Thomson Reuters together?
We obviously have Reuters, which is a news business, but it's a relatively small part of Thomson Reuters. We are the leading provider of content-driven technology to lawyers, tax,
accounting and audit professionals, and risk and compliance professionals.
There are two things that bind those three areas together and extends into the news side. First, professionals face very significant and never-ending increases in the complexity
associated with compliance - complying with laws, tax codes, audit regulations, ESG regulations. We clarify the complexity by providing content, through scalable technology.
The second is AI. We've been in the AI business for 30 years, and we think those professions will be transformed in interesting ways by generative AI . Combining our content with our
expertise around AI, we think we can be very valuable to our customers.
Does that mean
their jobs may be at risk?
We believe professionals will not be replaced by AI but might be by people using AI. We see it as a supplement and accelerant to the work they do, rather than a substitute. One of our
core principles is that a human being must take accountability for each piece of news , so we ensure that we've got a human in the loop in any of our news stories, and that has been
our experience in each of those professions.
How will their work change
in the coming years?
We think within three to five years every journalist will be using an AI assistant to help them do research, verify facts, generate story ideas, and create first drafts. The same goes for
lawyers, tax, audit and accounting professionals, maybe even people like me.
Why did the company choose
to bring its AI development
to Toronto?
Canada is doing a great job developing AI talent and moving the AI-industry forward in terms of research and development. I'd point to the Vector Institute that (AI godfather) Geoffrey
Hinton is affiliated with. The work that Vector has done and the research it's both undertaking and sponsoring is world-leading, and positions Canada - and specifically Toronto - at the
forefront.
I also think Canada's protection of IP and copyright have been underpinnings of the content industries, so there's an opportunity to build upon those efforts and accelerate into a global
leadership position in this space.
How is Thomson Reuters
staying true to the mission
of its founders?
Roy Thomson founded the Thomson Corporation in the 1960s selling transistor radios in rural Canada, and ended up buying radio stations, newspapers and TV stations, in Canada,
the U.S. and the U.K., eventually including Reuters, the largest wholesaler of news at that time.
Paul Julius Reuter founded Reuters in London 175 years ago using carrier pigeons and telegraphs, and two things were foundational and part of their business ethos.
The first was innovation. Julius Reuter was the first to put a cable under the Atlantic, becoming the first to report the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in Europe. The same is true of
Roy Thomson, who drove innovation in his newspaper , radio and TV businesses.
The second is our Trust Principals, which were created in 1941 but had been part of Reuters since the beginning.
They dictate that all the information we publish and all the solutions we provide are independent, unbiased and fact-based. You won't see opinion or narrative, a lean to the left or right you'll just see the facts.
Today we're embracing technology, and we continue to apply our Trust Principals. Our AI tools don't use customer inputs to determine output, all the information we publish has a
human that's accountable for it, and we provide transparency regarding the inputs of any AI product.
Innovation and trust have been embedded in the company for 175 years, and we think we're applying those quite forcefully and consistently in this new generative-AI era.
This interview has been
edited and condensed
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241228ekcs0007i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

71/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

Trustee urges provincial strategy on AI use in schools
Isabel Teotonio
871 words
15 February 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A13
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The province is being called on to help navigate the uncharted territory of artificial intelligence in schools, as educators worldwide grapple with how to responsibly use these rapidly
evolving technologies.
Trustee Markus de Domenico will present a motion on Thursday at the Toronto Catholic District School Board, calling for a provincial strategy on the use of AI in education - an issue
that is top of mind for the education minister.
Not a single school board in the province has an informed policy on the use of AI in the classroom, de Domenico told the Star, calling its use "both exciting and frightening."
"This is a lightning-speed technology that is rapidly, rapidly moving into society ... So why, as educators, are we are waiting?"
The technology, already in use by many students and classes, has the power to innovate teaching practices - but also brings various challenges, namely that students can cheat.
For instance, kids use YouTube summary tools that capture key points in videos, so they don't need to watch them. They use voice-to-text tools in science class so that, as they make
verbal observations during an experiment, it's automatically transcribed. They use free AI tutoring tools to provide step-by-step help during homework. And they can use AI tools for
writing assignments, prompting them to create text about a particular topic or requesting alternative viewpoints.
Teachers also use AI. For example, during a reading lesson, text can be entered into a tool and have the grade level adjusted to better meet the students needs. And teachers can
personalize activities to meet individual children's needs, so if a student doesn't speak English the activity can be translated and they can provide answers in their first language.
De Domenico told the Star that getting a handle on AI isn't something the board can do on its own, adding "I'm looking for the province to really bring us up to speed because they have
the resources."
He wants the TCDSB chair to write Education Minister Stephen Lecce requesting a "provincial strategy" on AI. That could include a provincial committee to help boards understand best
practices; a conference that explores key issues around AI use; and ongoing support and strategies for educators.
De Domenico says guidance on AI is key because while it's a valuable tool for teachers, it can also be used by students to cheat. (In 2022, the launch of OpenAI's ChatGPT - an
automated writing tool that creates text on demand - put generative AI in the spotlight, as it became the fastest-growing app ever.)
And because AI can be used for fraud, De Domenico says it's crucial for the board to understand it at a corporate level, noting the TCDSB has an annual budget of more than $1 billion.
Most importantly, he says, it's vital to prepare students for "an AI-influenced world" and "understand the dangers that AI can present to students and our entire system."
A notice of motion will be formally entered at a Thursday board meeting, and the matter will be discussed at a March 21 meeting.
The Ministry of Education says AI use in schools is a priority for Lecce, who is well aware of the opportunities and challenges.
"Well before this motion was introduced, Minister Lecce spoke with school board chairs and directors of education, where he indicated that we will develop an approach to address both
the risks and opportunities associated with the rise of artificial intelligence for students in schools," said his spokesperson Isha Chaudhuri.
"The minister believes, with proper safeguards, artificial intelligence can be an effective tool to aid in learning, which is why he will continue to consult with experts to harness a
productive and safe application of artificial intelligence in the classroom."
Although no Canadian province has issued advice on AI use in the class, several boards are working to create their own policies, guidance and procedures, including the Toronto
District School Board, Canada's largest.
Ottawa Catholic School Board is "embracing AI" and currently running pilot projects to see what works, says Director of Education Tom D'Amico.
While some teachers would like tools such as ChatGPT banned, he says, "We're not in an age, in 2024, where we don't want our kids using technology." Instead, he says teachers
and educators may need to change how they assess students so it's not easy to cheat.
He, and others from Canada, are looking at best practices in the United States, where seven states have provided schools with guidance. For instance, California recommends that
student safety and data privacy be prioritized; kids learn about AI literacy; and that staff and students are aware of the potential inaccuracies and biases of AI.
D'Amico says teaching AI literacy is crucial to bridging the digital divide and putting students on an equal playing field. He points to teens looking for a summer job as an example.
Those who know how to use AI can generate a cover letter and resume specific to a job posting, giving them an advantage over those who don't.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240215ek2f0009f

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

72/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
3320 words
1 August 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of BCE Inc. ( BCE-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BCE-T/] ) rose on Thursday after saying its earnings rose in the second quarter as it focused
on cost management in a highly competitive environment, while adjusted earnings dipped.
The telecoms giant says earnings attributable to shareholders came in at $537-million, up from $329-million in the same quarter last year.
Earnings worked out to 59 cents a share for the quarter ending June 30, up from 37 cents a share last year.
The rise in profits came even as operating revenue of $6.01-billion was down slightly from $6.07-billion last year.
Bell says the increased profits were due to lower other expenses, including lower buying obligations, severance and acquisition costs.
The company says adjusted earnings were $712-million, or 78 cents per share, down slightly from $722 million, or 79 cents per share last year.
Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. ( CNQ-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CNQ-T/] ) gained in the wake of beating second-quarter profit estimates on
Thursday, as the energy producer benefited from higher crude prices and a rise in output.
Crude prices traded higher in the April-June quarter on escalating tensions in the Middle East, OPEC+ production cut extension and expectations of interest rate cuts from the U.S.
Federal Reserve.
Canadian Natural said the realized price for exploration and production liquids rose to $86.64 per barrel in the quarter from $72.06 per barrel a year ago.
It delivered 8-per-cent growth in average production despite the second quarter of each calendar year being a period of high turnaround activity for the company.
Total production stood at 1.29 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) in the quarter, higher than 1.19 million boepd a year earlier.
Realized prices for synthetic crude oil rose over 14 per cent to $108.81 per barrel.
The Calgary-based company’s second-quarter net income rose 17.2 per cent to $1.72-billion from a year earlier.
“Our capital program for 2024 remains on target and as per our free cash flow allocation policy, we are returning 100% of free cash flow to shareholders in 2024 and we will continue to
manage this allocation on a forward looking annual basis,” Canadian Natural’s CFO Mark Stainthorpe said in a statement.
Canadian Natural posted adjusted net earnings from operations of 88 cents per share for the three months ended June 30, compared with analysts’ average estimate of 81 cents per
share, according to LSEG data.
Pipeline operator TC Energy Corp. ( TRP-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TRP-T/] ) increased after it beat second-quarter profit estimates on Thursday,
helped by strength in its natural gas pipelines.
Extremely hot weather prompted consumers to increase their usage of air conditioners and refrigerators in the reported quarter, creating demand for natural gas.
Quarterly earnings from its Canadian natural gas pipelines, came in at $514-million, compared to a loss of $394-million in the year-ago period. Earnings from its Mexico pipelines were
up 46.2 per cent at $266-million.
The company reported an adjusted profit of 94 cents per share for the quarter ended June 30, compared with analysts’ average estimate of 91 cents per share, according to LSEG data
Lightspeed Commerce Inc. ( LSPD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/LSPD-T/] ) jumped after it reported better-than expected revenue and adjusted
earnings in its fiscal first quarter and slightly upped its bottom line forecast for the year.
But the Montreal commerce software company’s report for the three months ending June 30 underscored continued weakness in key areas where investors are looking for a notable lift
before reigniting a stock that has shown little signs of life since crashing at the start of the tech downturn nearly three years ago. The company’s performance challenges resulted in the
departure of CEO Jean Paul Chauvet earlier this year and return of founding CEO Dax Dasilva, as well as a 10-per-cent staff cut and stock buyback announced in April.
Subscription revenue, a key indicator of growth in the business, increased by six per cent over the same period a year earlier to US$83.3-million. The company in May said that
revenue growth would be “consistent” with the seven per cent it posted in the fourth quarter.
Lightspeed also said that the number of larger customer locations generating more than US$500,000 and US$1-million in gross transaction volumes increased by four per cent year
over year. That segment is important for Lightspeed as it has shifted its strategy in the past two years to serving these relatively larger clients while shedding smaller customers. The
increases in both larger segments were lower than the five-per-cent and six-per-cent growth they posted, respectively, in the fourth quarter. It also marked the seventh straight quarter
of declines in those segments.
- Sean Silcoff
NFI Group Inc. ( NFI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NFI-T/] ) rose after reporting it earned US$3-million in its second quarter, up from a net loss of
US$48-million a year earlier.
The Winnipeg-based company says its revenue for the quarter totalled US$851-million, up from US$660-million last year.
Earnings per share were 2 US cents, compared with a loss of 62 US cents last year.
NFI says the second quarter of 2024 was their first positive earnings quarter in three years.
President and CEO Paul Soubry says the company’s supply chain health has improved, though in some areas some of its suppliers are experiencing delivery delays.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

73/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Mr. Soubry says the company anticipates this will continue throughout the year as suppliers ramp up production to meet demand from NFI.
“NFI delivered solid results, driven by normalizing Manufacturing activity and continued strength in Aftermarket,” said ATB Capital Markets analyst Chris Murray. “The Company
confirmed that legacy contracts are now “materially completed” paving the way for a stronger recovery in H2/24 after production/delivery volumes continued to normalize in Q2/24.
Management reaffirmed 2024 and 2025 guidance, as improving supply chain conditions, demand conditions, and liquidity levels remain supportive of the Company’s recovery. ... NFI
delivered a solid quarter, positioning the Company’s normal production rates and margins in H2/24 and 2025. We expect the results to be well-received.”
Meta Platforms Inc. ( META-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/META-Q/] ) soared on Thursday after the tech firm beat quarterly revenue estimates and
forecast upbeat third-quarter sales indicating that strong digital-ad spending on its social media platforms can cover the cost of its AI investments.
The Facebook parent recorded revenue of US$39.1-billion for the April to June period, compared with analysts’ expectations of US$38.3-billion, according to LSEG data.
Meta was “continuing to see healthy global advertising demand” and was also reaping the fruits of a multi-year project to use artificial intelligence to improve targeting, ranking and
delivery systems for digital ads on its platforms, Chief Financial Officer Susan Li said on a post-earnings call.
Meta also signaled it would continue to spend big on AI infrastructure, forecasting 2024 capital expenditure between US$37-billion and US$40-billion.
“GenAI will require significant infrastructure investments to train the next generation of large foundational models and Meta is getting ahead of a multi-year capacity ramp,” J.P.Morgan
analysts said.
Meta’s 12-month forward price-to-earnings ratio stands at 21.1, compared with Alphabet’s 20.6 and Microsoft’s 31.
Analysts have a median price target of US$550 on Meta’s shares.
Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q/] ) was higher ahead of the highly anticipated release of its quarterly results after the bell.
The company’s hares have risen about 23 per cent this year. The stock has shed more than 6 per cent since July 8, when it hit a record, part of a broader market selloff led by U.S.
megacaps.
It is expected to join Google ( GOOGL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q/] ) and Microsoft ( MSFT-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q/] ) on Thursday in reporting a surge in capital spending on artificial intelligence as Big Tech companies rush to
capitalize on the booming technology.
The e-commerce giant’s capital investments - mostly for building cloud and generative AI infrastructure - is expected to have risen 43 per cent in the second quarter to US$16.41billion, according to LSEG data. That represents a roughly US$1.5-billion increase from the previous three months.
The steep spending is also expected to pressure Amazon’s margins, outweighing benefits from cost cuts and supply chain efficiencies that are aiding the retail unit’s profitability.
The company’s Amazon Web Services (AWS) business has long dominated the cloud-computing market but it has been facing tough competition from Microsoft in recent quarters after
the Windows maker rolled out AI-powered services to its Azure cloud business.
Growth in its North American retail business likely slowed to 8 per cent between April and June, from 12.3 per cent in the January-March quarter, amid signs of a wider slowdown in
consumer spending and some competition from new and fast-growing Chinese players such as Temu and Tiktok Shop that are enticing more U.S. shoppers.
Amazon’s total revenue is expected to have grown 10.6 per cent to US$148.56-billion - the slowest rise in five quarters.
On the decline
Shares of Thomson Reuters Corp. ( TRI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TRI-T/] ) were lower on Thursday after it reported second-quarter earnings that
topped Wall Street expectations as revenue rose 6 per cent and it continued to aggressively deploy artificial intelligence technology for its customers.
The company now forecasts full year revenue at the high end of projections, or a rise of about 7 per cent.
Steve Hasker, President and CEO, said in an interview after publishing financial results, “We remain highly encouraged by the customer reaction to our new AI driven products” that
include generative AI products such as Westlaw AI and CoCounsel.
CoCounsel is a chat-based generative AI (GenAI) assistant that can help draft documents, sift through research and locate information scattered across different sources for legal
professionals.
Technology company investors have questioned whether the euphoria over the productivity and cost-saving benefits of the new technology popularized by OpenAI’s ChatGPT and
Microsoft’s Copilot services are actually translating to usage across workforces.
Thomson Reuters Chief Financial Officer Mike Eastwood said the company would begin providing a new generative AI -type metric to help directly address questions on customer
usage of new products.
“So far so good,” Mr. Eastwood said, pointing to the company’s sales forecast as an indication of its confidence level in generative AI yielding returns.
The Toronto-based content and technology company reported quarterly revenue of US$1.74-billion, up from US$1.65-billion a year earlier. Wall Street had expected US$1.75-billion in
the quarter, according to LSEG data.
Operating profit fell 50 per cent to US$415-million, falling short of expectations of $463 million. The 2023 period included a US$347-million gain on the sale of a business. Adjusted
earnings, excluding one time items, came it at 85 US cents per share, versus 82 US cents expected.
Revenue in the “Big 3″ segments of the company comprised of legal, tax and accounting and corporates, rose 7 per cent.
Executives said capital expenditure as a percentage of revenue, or what it calls capital intensity, is expected to remain at 8.5 per cent this year and at around 8 per cent for 2025 and
2026.
Cenovus Energy Inc. ( CVE-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CVE-T/] ) slid after it posted a more than 15-per-cent rise in its second-quarter profit on
Thursday, as the oil and gas producer got a boost from higher crude prices, refining throughput volumes and production.
Brent crude averaged at US$85.58 per barrel in the second quarter, 7 per cent higher than the year earlier, buoyed by an extension of a production cut by OPEC+, forecast of strong
travel demand and interest rate cuts by the U.S. Federal Reserve.
Calgary’s Cenovus raised its total upstream production forecast for the year by 7,500 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) at the midpoint. It now expects output to be between
785,000 boepd and 810,000 boepd for 2024.
Its quarterly production rose nearly 10 per cent to 800,800 boepd, while downstream throughput climbed nearly 16 per cent to 622,700 barrels per day (bpd).
Cenovus CEO Jon McKenzie said the company is now in a position to substantially increase shareholder returns.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

74/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Beginning in the third quarter, Cenovus will begin returning 100 per cent of excess free funds flow to shareholders.
For full-year 2024, the company raised its downstream throughput projection to 640,000 bpd to 670,000 bpd, an increase of 5,000 bpd from its previous forecast at midpoint.
Net income rose to $1-billion, or 53 cents per share, in the April-June quarter, from $866-million, or 44 cents per share, a year earlier.
Toronto-based waste management company GFL Environmental Inc. ( GFL-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GFL-T/] ) decreased in the wake of ruling out
a sale of the entire company to private buyers [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-waste-management-giant-gfl-rules-out-sale-of-whole-company-plans/] , but is
considering running an auction for its environmental services division.
In early June, The Globe and Mail reported that GFL had retained J.P. Morgan [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-waste-management-giant-gfl-hires-financial-adviserto-review-two/] to assess two buyout offers – one for the entire business and another for the environmental services unit.
Late Wednesday, GFL killed the prospect of a complete sale as part of its second-quarter earnings report. Because management sees strong organic growth potential, “we do not
believe that taking GFL private at this time is in the best long-term interest of our shareholders,” founder and chief executive officer Patrick Dovigi said in a statement. “At its current
disconnected market valuation, we are a buyer of GFL, not a seller.” As of Wednesday’s market close, the company’s market capitalization is $20.1-billion.
However, Mr. Dovigi said a sale of GFL’s environmental services division, which offers liquid waste management and soil remediation services, was a possibility, adding that the
proceeds from such a sale could be used to pay down debt.
“We have received current preliminary expressions of interest in a transaction that supports our valuation perspective and are actively engaged in implementing preparatory steps
required to potentially complete such a transaction,” he said of the division. Mr. Dovigi added that any sale would be completed through a formal auction.
- Tim Kiladze
Canada Goose Holdings Inc. ( GOOS-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOS-T/] ) declined even after beating Wall Street estimates for quarterly revenue
on Thursday, benefiting from steady consumer demand in China for its puffer jackets and sweats, bucking an industry-wide slowdown seen by luxury players in the region.
The company’s efforts to expand into the non-winter category by offering products that include rain and warm weather clothing such as fleece, t-shirts and shorts helped bump sales in
the Asia-Pacific region and resulted in a third consecutive quarter of growth in China.
That came in contrast with results from top luxury names like LVMH, Burberry and Hugo Boss which still pointed to reduced spending on their products by shoppers in China, and a
market that was taking longer to recover post-pandemic.
“(In China) we continue to open popup stores where and when we have opportunities to do that in the right time, and really our seasonally relevant spring and summer products have
helped drive strong consumer demand,” CEO Dani Reiss told Reuters.
Canada Goose’s sales in Greater China rose 2.4 per cent during the first quarter, while the United States saw a 0.4-per-cent rise.
After several quarters of falling sales, Canada Goose last quarter noted that demand had rebounded in the U.S. mainly in the e-commerce segment, while the wholesale segment
remained under pressure.
Its wholesale revenues were down 41 per cent in the first quarter, while sales through its own stores and online - known as the direct-to-consumer channel - rose 13 per cent in the
same period.
The Toronto-based group’s first-quarter revenue rose 3.3 per cent to $88.1-million, beating LSEG estimates of $86.1-million.
It also posted a smaller-than-expected quarterly loss of 79 cents, compared to analysts’ expectations for a loss of 80 cents.
Parkland Corp. ( PKI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PKI-T/] ) slipped after saying it earned $70-million in the second quarter, down from $78-million a
year earlier.
The company’s sales and operating revenue was $7.5-billion, down from $7.8-billion during the same quarter in 2023.
Diluted earnings per share were 39 cents, down from 43 cents last year.
Parkland revised its guidance for adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the year to $1.9-billion, down from $2-billion.
It attributed the softer guidance to the unplanned shutdown at its Burnaby refinery in the first quarter, and unfavourable market conditions that it says could persist throughout the year.
The company’s refinery in Burnaby, B.C., saw a shutdown in January due to extreme cold weather.
In a research note, ATB Capital Markets analyst Nate Heywood said: “Overall, we view the print as neutral. Adjusted EBITDA of $504-million increased 7 per cent year-over-year
(Q2/23: $470-million) and is in-line with consensus of $503mm (ATB estimate: $517-million). The miss to our estimate of $517mm was largely driven by lower Canada and US prints,
partially offset by strength from the international business. With the update, management lowered its 2024 EBITDA guidance range by $50-million to $1,900-million-$2,000-million
(ATBe: $1,957-million/consensus: $1,908-million) from $1,950-million-$2,050-million as a result of Burnaby refinery headwinds in Q1/24 and unfavourable market conditions for H1/24.
The print was complemented with continued utilization of the NCIB, with PKI repurchasing ~$29mm of shares (0.7 million shares) in Q2/24 and $111-million of its shares across H1/24.
Additionally, PKI announced the retirement of Board Chair Mr. Steve Richardson and the election of Mr. Michael Jennings to succeed him.”
Moderna Inc. ( MRNA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MRNA-Q/] ) cut its 2024 sales forecast for COVID-19 and respiratory syncytial virus vaccines by
up to 25 per cent, or US$1-billion, as it expects very low sales to the EU, sending shares of the vaccine maker down.
The company had previously said it expected roughly US$4-billion in sales for the year, which was already the lowest figure for annual revenue since it launched its COVID vaccine in
late 2020 - the company’s first commercial product.
Moderna reported a net loss of US$1.3-billion, or US$3.33 per share, for the second quarter. Analysts had expected a loss of US$3.39 per share, according to LSEG data.
Total revenue for the second quarter was US$241-million, compared to US$344-million, a year ago.
Chief Financial Officer James Mock told Reuters it had yet to secure a joint purchasing agreement with the EU, although it was still in discussions.
“Given where we are in the season combined with where we are in the budget season for many countries and their existing supplies, we feel there’s a very low probability that we’ll
have very much (EU) sales in 2024,” he said.
The company said it now expects to make between US$3-billion and US$3.5-billion in sales for the year following discussions with EU officials over COVID-19 vaccine contracts for the
bloc.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-thursday-august-1-and-why/]

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

75/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240801ek81001p5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

76/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

CU

When real reviews are hard to come by, does AI have a place in arts marketing?
Aisling Murphy
1570 words
13 April 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
C8
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

" ... powerful and poignant."
" ... hits home."
" ... deeply moving, brilliantly acted."
These quotes describe two Toronto theatre shows. Two are from well-respected local media outlets, and one is from what many experts say is a source known for its AI-generated
news .
It's hard to tell the difference. Even those in theatre marketing are grappling with how to tell those fake reviews apart from real ones.
Theatre criticism has been a precarious position for decades. In Canada, there are only two salaried theatre critics - Joshua Chong from the Toronto Star and J. Kelly Nestruck from the
Globe and Mail - while the rest of the country's theatre coverage is cobbled together by a small network of freelancers and volunteer bloggers.
The disappearance of theatre criticism and critics makes for an uphill battle for theatre marketers: if a critic can't attend a show to write about it, how will theatre companies sell their
work? Review quotes are often crucial to the success of a production - you might have noticed testimonials on theatre billboards and posters around Toronto - but with the
disappearance of critics, those quotes have become harder and harder to come by.
Two companies, Soulpepper and Theatre Passe Muraille, recently shared positive review quotes to their respective social media accounts, from reviews tagged with bylines for staffers
at a publication called BNN Breaking. The site is an established digital news aggregator based in Hong Kong, and in recent years has been embroiled in controversy for disseminating
fake news . One BNN reporter claims to use " AI tools " for the site on her LinkedIn page, and an investigation by San Francisco-based news outlet SFGate said BNN Breaking's high
volume of daily stories "raises questions about whether some of the posts are being written with the assistance of AI."
A review clip included as a promotional testimony for Soulpepper's production of "Three Sisters" calls the production "powerful and poignant," alongside similarly positive review quotes
from the Globe and Mail and Toronto Star. Theatre Passe Muraille, meanwhile, shared a positive review clip of Luke Reece's solo show "As I Must Live It," saying Reece "steps onto the
stage with a narrative that cuts deep into the silence of men's struggles."
After locating the two reviews, running them through AI checkers GPTZero, ZeroGPT and Quillbot, and consulting with David Rokeby, director of the BMO Lab for Creative Research in
the Arts, Performance, Emerging Technologies and AI at the University of Toronto, the Star has confirmed that these reviews are almost certainly AI-generated.
In an email to the Star, representatives for Soulpepper said the company "value(s) the history of theatre journalism as well as the hard work and care that reviewers take when giving
an honest and informed critique of (their) productions," adding that the company does not "actively research or scrutinize reviews to see (if they are) AI-generated as it's not something
(the company has) considered." Following the Star's request for comment, the company said they will more heavily scrutinize review quotes in future marketing endeavours.
Representatives for Theatre Passe Muraille said the theatre does not "knowingly" use marketing content written by AI, and confirmed that no journalists from BNN Breaking had been
invited to review "As I Must Live It."
"It was only through contact with the Toronto Star that I came to realize the story ... was most likely AI-generated," said Theatre Passe Muraille publicist Suzanne Cheriton. "This is new
territory for me (and for my colleagues, I suspect). I am a passionate supporter of arts journalism and journalists and will be alerting all my clients of the suspected issues with (BNN
Breaking)."
Meanwhile, Rokeby confirmed that several social media graphics shared by Crow's Theatre are also AI-generated. Images posted on Instagram for holidays including St. Patrick's Day
and World Theatre Day contain several clues indicating their roots in AI, such as garbled text and logical discrepancies in how the images are composed.
In a statement to the Star, Carrie Sager, director of marketing and communications for Crow's Theatre, said the theatre used AI in its marketing for "The Master Plan," a play that in part
examines the evolving relationship between humans and technology, last fall.
"We very consciously created the main marketing image and promo video for 'The Master Plan' with AI," said Sager, "and we were very transparent about it. We even put glitches in the
promo video."
In a followup email to the Star, Sager added that Crow's has a full-time graphic designer on staff. "We have not used AI on other marketing campaigns and do not have plans to do so in
the future ," she said, but didn't comment on individual social media posts.
How to spot AI-created elements in theatre marketing
"There are big, big giveaways that the Reece review is AI based on how it's written," said Rokeby. "The review of 'As I Must Live It' has that 'in conclusion' part, which is such a
ChatGPT , mansplaining response."
Rokeby says sites like BNN Breaking could actually contribute to a serious problem in the world of AI: by regurgitating AI-created text, these sites weaken the available data set for
other AI engines, creating a vicious loop of progressively worse writing to improve services like ChatGPT .
"This AI-generated content is not useful, it's not good training material," said Rokeby. "It just reinforces what AI already knows. So there's been a notable degradation in systems that
are trained on new stuff ... it's dumbing down. It's not providing unique perspectives. It's not specific about what might make an actual review, and what might be relevant."
Rokeby believes the onus now falls on marketing professionals to double-check the sources they amplify, in order to ensure the reviews that circulate are written and read by real
people.
"No one's looking closely enough to say, 'oh, wait a minute, this really isn't very deep,'" he said.
Theatre scholar and critic Don Rubin, who co-founded the Canadian Theatre Review as well as the Canadian Theatre Critics Association, says the use of theatre reviews for marketing
purposes is a long-established tradition - theatre companies will often condense quotes in order to make them sound more positive or fit onto a poster.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

77/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

"But if there's no real reviewer named, and the location of this reviewer isn't named, you have no idea if their writing has anything to do with this production," he said. "That's just plainly
unethical ... AI-generated review excerpts - that's going into another world, and a pretty scary one. I would just run from that, and hope that the theatres, including their PR and
marketing people, would run from it as well."
Rokeby, meanwhile, believes there's also "a labour question" that needs to be considered. "Images like this replace the artists who would have had a job generating images for social
media or posters ... it's so easy to make these images, which are sort of a logical result of Instagram culture. There's an appeal to things being accompanied by an image. But then
there's a hunger for more and more images."
Rokeby predicts humans will soon get good at spotting AI-generated art in the wild - beyond easier-to-spot tells like phantom limbs - and says we should brace ourselves for more AIgenerated art in everyday life.
"I think there's going to be a point where we'll all be so tired of seeing these generated images," he said. "We're going to get pretty good at recognizing them ... it's going to be very
interesting to see how this settles. I hope we end up in a space that doesn't flatten and diminish the human creativity side of things, with endless feeds of images that only machines are
looking at. That would be a sad, strange fate for art."
How can AI be a positive force in theatre?
While the rise of AI might be troubling to some, a handful of Toronto theatre artists are looking for opportunities to meaningfully weave the technology into the art of live performance.
"(Working with AI) has challenged my assumptions," said award-winning director Mitchell Cushman, who in recent months has worked with a graphic designer who specializes in AI.
"My default place is being more excited about human artists creating things than robots - that's in my DNA. But I think the intersection between the two offers interesting possibilities, in
terms of how an artist might be able to use AI tools to deepen or change something about the practice.
"I'm trying to draw a line somewhere," he continued, "and I think the line is where AI is being used as a tool, versus when it's being used to replace something artistic. I'm at the
beginning of understanding this, and I find it easier to picture the dystopian versions of AI than the utopian ones. But it seems like AI is here to stay, and it's only going to get more
deeply embedded in everything we do. I'm on the lookout for ways it can be used to increase human artistic capacity as opposed to replace it."
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240413ek4d0006f

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

78/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

National

AI-generated videos evolving beyond glitchy to become cinematic - and hard to spot; Videos generated by artificial
intelligence-powered systems such as Sora and Viggle can now render scenes that challenge reality
Patrick Dell
701 words
24 April 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

This article is part of The Globe’s initiative to cover dis- and misinformation. E-mail us to share tips or feedback at disinfodesk@globeandmail.com
[mailto:disinfodesk@globeandmail.com] .
Video production and filmmaking have undergone huge technological changes in a few generations, from silent black-and-white films to blockbusters brimming with CGI. Now the
growing capabilities of video generation using artificial intelligence seem ready to usher in a new era of visual creation.
Next Stop Paris is an example that has garnered much attention for its use of this technology. It is the first original production from TCLtv+, a streaming service from electronics
manufacturer TCL, made using generative AI technology and other video creation tools.
The trailer has the hallmarks of video made by generative AI , including shots subtly shifting between frames and stiff animation. A press release [https://www.lightreading.com/videostreaming/tcl-s-streaming-service-launches-production-studio-for-original-content] from TCL said the romantic short uses professional voice actors and was written by two staff (not an
AI such as ChatGPT , despite the number of clichés in the dialogue). TCL used Stable Diffusion’s [https://stability.ai/stable-video] video system to make the visuals, without ever
needing to set foot in the City of Lights.
The company said a multinational team, including Canadians, worked on Next Stop Paris and that it is an “early experiment bringing tech and creative together in a hybrid
entertainment format.” It will be released in the summer.
While Next Stop Paris may not be challenging Hallmark in the romantic movie market yet, it is a big improvement over the 2023 AI-generated clip of Will Smith eating pasta
[https://www.reddit.com/r/StableDiffusion/comments/1244h2c/will_smith_eating_spaghetti/] , which looked more Lovecraftian than real. Now other systems are taking the technology
further.
Microsoft recently unveiled VASA-1 [https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/vasa-1/] , a video-generation system that can take a single image of a face and a piece of music
and make a highly realistic animation. The computer giant calls it “Lifelike Audio-Driven Talking Faces Generated in Real Time.” Here’s its example of the Mona Lisa rapping.
Critics have called it an automatic deepfake generator. Deepfakes are videos in which one person’s face is animated over another’s. It’s not a new technique but in the past has needed
specialized software and a powerful computer. Now it can be done in moments in your web browser. Deepfakes can make anyone say or do anything, from presidents talking about a
video game [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB6lN5b9CfQ] to revenge porn [https://www.nsvrc.org/blogs/feminism/taylor-swift-and-dangers-deepfake-pornography] .
Microsoft says it has no plans to make VASA-1 available to the public because of those concerns. But there are similar tools already available.
Viggle [https://viggle.ai/] can animate an avatar or image to a piece of music or dialogue. It’s not as smooth as Microsoft’s offering but has been used to make OpenAI’s Sam Altman
look like an animated character [https://x.com/anukaakash/status/1771570988670668826] and to mimic a news reporter at a crime scene, which raises the fear that it will be used to
propagate disinformation.
As these video-generation systems improve, distinguishing their output from real footage is becoming very challenging, but careful examination can still reveal some clues. Take a look
at this sample video from Sora [https://openai.com/sora] , OpenAI’s video generator (which is not available to the public yet).
It’s very impressive and highly detailed, but look more closely at the bottom left corner, which we’ve zoomed into and slowed down.
You can see the hand holding the pole suddenly shifts and the structure of the pole changes , making it look unbalanced and difficult to hold.
Another sample from Sora, of a construction site, shows a forklift suddenly changing direction and the high-visibility jacket of a worker changing colour. We circled both areas to make
them easier to spot.
Depending on the scene created, clips from video generators can be indistinguishable from something real. It has enormous creative potential, but now more than ever, it’s hard to
believe what you see.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: AI-generated videos evolving beyond glitchy to become cinematic - and hard to spot
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-ai-generated-videos-sora/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240424ek4o001xh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

79/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

Canada's new Nobel laureate sees risks, rewards in the AI revolution
By IVAN SEMENIUK

1518 words
9 October 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Geoffrey Hinton's work paved way for applications such as ChatGPT
Geoffrey Hinton, a University of Toronto computer scientist whose work laid the foundations for a revolution in artificial intelligence and who has since been vocal about the
technology's dangers, has been named a co-recipient of this year's Nobel Prize in physics.
Dr. Hinton, 76, was awarded the prize together with John Hopfield, 91, a physicist and professor emeritus at Princeton University. The two will share equally in the 11-million Swedish
krona ($1.4-million) prize, announced on Tuesday by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.
Beginning in the 1980s, Dr. Hopfield and Dr. Hinton made separate and crucial contributions to the development of computer algorithms known as neural networks. Based on the way
neurons connect and interact in the brain, the networks can adjust themselves in response to their own performance, gradually optimizing their ability to solve various kinds of
calculations.
While their progress came slowly at first, neural networks have since proved to be a watershed for machine learning . Aided by blindingly fast computer processors and vast
repositories of training data that were not available decades ago, systems based on neural networks first became powerful and then transformative.
“I want to emphasize that AI is going to do tremendous good," Dr. Hinton told The Globe and Mail after learning of his Nobel win. “In areas like health care, it's going to be amazing.
That's why its development is never going to be stopped. The real question is, can we keep it safe?"
Neural networks lie at the heart of a range of applications that feature AI, including image search, speech recognition, forecasting, natural language processing and the ability to
generate new content based on prompts, as evidenced by an array of commercial AI products such as ChatGPT .
In recent years, the advent of machine learning based on neural networks has been alternately hailed as a boon to discovery and productivity and feared as a disruptive force that will
eliminate jobs, undermine creativity and potentially threaten human existence.
Indeed, so rapid has been the technology's ascent, with AI-powered tools now rolling out across a wide range of industries and fields, that Dr.
Hinton has become just as well known for his warnings about AI as for the technology he helped to create.
As AI becomes more ubiquitous, the opportunities for its misuse are also growing, including its use in weapons of war, Dr. Hinton said. A more existential threat is the longer-term
possibility that AI systems will eventually grow so intelligent relative to human decision makers that they effectively take control.
“‘What we care about is people and we'd like people to stay in charge," he said.
Dr. Hinton has received multiple accolades for his work, including the Turing Award, considered the most prestigious prize in computer science.
But as a non-physicist he said he was taken completely by surprise when he was informed via a telephone call from Stockholm that he had won the physics Nobel.
When asked what the impact of becoming a Nobel laureate might have on an already celebrated career, Dr. Hinton said: “I think it will give me more credibility in talking about the risks
of AI."
Born in Wimbledon, near London, in 1947, Dr.
Hinton completed his undergraduate studies at the University of Cambridge and then went on to earn a PhD at the University of Edinburgh in 1978.
After working at various universities in Britain and the United States, he came to the University of Toronto in 1987. It has been his academic home base for most of his career since
then, including during a 10-year stint at Google. Dr. Hinton, who is both a Canadian and British citizen, ended his position with the U.S.-based company in 2023 so that he could speak
freely about the potential dangers of artificial intelligence .
Dr. Hinton's co-winner, Dr. Hopfield, was born in Chicago in 1933 and received his PhD from Cornell University in 1958.
After making important contributions to solid state physics and to the study of biochemical reactions, Dr. Hopfield became interested in the questions related to neuroscience, including
how neurons in the brain act together to store and retrieve information. This led him to discover a computerbased analogue known as a Hopfield network, which allows a machine to
retrieve a stored pattern that is most similar to a given input. His work was published in 1982 in what is now considered a landmark paper in the field.
Soon after, Dr. Hinton made use of Hopfield networks when developing a data-recognition algorithm. Using methods drawn from statistical physics, he and Terrence Sejnowski of Johns
Hopkins University came up with a method in which a category of network called a Boltzmann machine could be trained to classify an image or similar input based on examples.
Dr. Hinton then continued to explore networks constructed in layers that could break down a task such as image or language recognition into bitesized pieces that together led to an
answer that the system calculated was most likely to be correct.
A key feature of this work was the use of a technique called back-propagation by Dr. Hinton and his collaborators, including U.S. psychologist and computer scientist David Rumelhart.
This method amounts to feeding the network information about its own accuracy so that it can adjust how much weight to give to each of its subcomponents, or nodes, to keep
improving through experience.
Today's AI systems have their basis in this kind of interactive version of machine learning .
Yoshua Bengio, another machine-learning pioneer and scientific director of the Montreal-based research hub MILA, said the foundational work by Dr. Hinton helped to inspire his own
trajectory in the field. The influence went beyond Dr. Hinton's specific methods, Dr. Bengio said, and extended to “the more fundamental idea that maybe we can understand
intelligence as something beautiful and simple, mathematically, which was not the way of thinking at that time."
Through the 1990s, neural networks also had their detractors. Many experts favoured efforts that gave computer systems access to large amounts of information and predetermined
rules for solving problems. But where those approaches enjoyed success in some specific domains, neural networks eventually proved more versatile in the era of fast computers and
big data.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

80/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Dr. Hinton said that by 2006 it was apparent to him that the approach was working, but he was nevertheless astonished by the speed at which neural networks took off after that.
“What's really surprised me is how good they are at understanding natural language – that happened much faster than I thought," he said. “And I'm still amazed that they really do
understand what they're saying."
While the Nobel citation underscores the early years of the field, Dr. Hinton said that his most important contribution was doggedly sticking with neural networks as a research focus for
half a century, during which time he developed a variety of methods for improving them.
Dr. Bengio said that Dr. Hinton's more recent outspokenness about the risks of AI is not a contradiction but a recognition of reality now that learning algorithms have proved surprisingly
adept at mastering conversational language among other complex tasks.
“We have to be rational about it, and ‘be rational' here is accept our lack of knowledge about how it could unfold, and then apply the precautionary principle to make sure nothing
catastrophic happens," Dr. Bengio said.
In his role as one of the “godfathers" of AI, Dr.
Hinton is also known for fostering a circle of graduate students at the University of Toronto who have been instrumental in AI's development, including Ilya Sutskever, former chief
scientist at OpenAI, the company that created ChatGPT .
An emeritus professor at the University of Toronto since 2014, Dr. Hinton is chief scientific adviser at the UoT-adjacent Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence . He also advises the
Learning in Machines & Brains program at CIFAR (formerly the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research).
In a statement, Stephen Toope, CIFAR's president and chief executive, praised Dr. Hinton's persistence in the development of neural networks and his leadership in the organization's
AI-related research programs.
With Tuesday's announcement, Dr. Hinton becomes one of seven Canadian-born or Canadianbased researchers to have won the world's top physics prize.
The others are Richard E. Taylor (1990), Bertram Brockhouse (1994), Willard Boyle (2009), Arthur McDonald (2015), Donna Strickland (2018) and James Peebles (2019).
Dr. Hinton said that he made his decision to come to Canada not just to do science but because of the country's social system and multicultural diversity.
“It doesn't have as much money as places like the United States," he said, but Canada's federal granting system has a track record of supporting curiosity-driven basic research. “And
that's what led to all of this."
With a report from Joe Castaldo
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020241009eka90000r

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

81/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

With the rise of AI fraud, wealth management firms caught in a ‘cat-and-mouse game’; Advisors must be prepared for more
sophisticated cyberattacks
Joel Schlesinger
1168 words
13 March 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Sign up for the Globe Advisor weekly newsletter for professional financial advisors on our sign-up page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/?
utm_source=Globe%20Advisor&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter&utm_content=2021-1217_7&utm_term=advisor_weekly_cross_promote_advisor_markets&cu_id=6SJND3YLRIZaO5PUPgekOHYjPo35ExpC#globe-advisor-newsletters] . Get exclusive investment industry
news and insights, the week’s top headlines, and what you and your clients need to know. For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Artificial intelligence (AI) cuts both ways for wealth management firms in Canada.
On the one hand, generative AI ’s promise as an investment theme has driven many client portfolios back to profitability after 2022′s market declines on the back of crushing inflation
and interest rate hikes.
On the other hand, AI’s fast-growing use stokes anxieties among wealth management firms’ information technology (IT) teams, who are increasingly concerned fraudsters are
leveraging this technological marvel to scam not only clients but advisors too.
“Whenever the movement of money is involved, it’s always a good idea to verify if what someone is telling you is true,” says Chris Nicola, chief strategy officer at Vancouver-based
Nicola Wealth Management Ltd., which focuses on serving high-net-worth clients.
Fraud Prevention Month in March could not be timelier given the need for greater awareness among advisors, wealth management firms’ leadership and clients, whose heightened
vigilance is often the best defence against increasingly sophisticated scams leveraging widely available generative AI tools .
Last month, KPMG surveyed 300 Canadian organizations victimized by fraud and found that 95 per cent of leaders are very concerned that deep fakes increase the risk of fraud at their
companies.
“The technology is indeed a double-edged sword,” says Joel Moses, chief technology officer at F5 Inc. in Seattle, a provider of cybersecurity solutions, including for Canadian financial
institutions.
“It can be used for cybersecurity to defend against attacks, but attackers also use generative AI very well to increase the effectiveness, magnitude and reach of their attacks.”
A TransUnion report [https://www.transunion.ca/fraud-trends/reports/2024-state-of-omnichannel-fraud-report] to be released this month found the financial services industry in Canada
saw a 76 per cent year-over-year increase in digital fraud in 2023, compared with a 3 per cent rise globally.
The Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre also reports [https://antifraudcentre-centreantifraude.ca/index-eng.htm] Canadians lost about $554-million to fraud in 2023, up from $531-million in
2022.
“The future [of fraud] is here today, and it’s only going to get more interesting,” says Larry Zelvin, head of the financial crimes unit at BMO Financial Group in New York.
He adds many AI-driven frauds and cyberattacks bear the same characteristics as those perpetrated before the technology was available. Typically, these are forms of phishing attacks,
posing as someone a victim knows and trusts to get log-in credentials and passwords.
“But AI takes it to a whole new level,” says Mr. Zelvin, former director of the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center for the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security.
“For one, the bar to enter the space is lower, so you don’t need a lot of technical skills to do these attacks anymore.”
Generative AI also makes fraud more cost-effective. Fraudsters can create more targeted attacks with less work against a wider swath of targets, with increased chances of success.
“AI has taken the traditional thinking of financial motivation for attacks and turned it on its ear,” Mr. Moses says. “It’s basically superpowered attackers.”
Wealth management firms are a big target too because criminals follow the money. “It’s in the name of the industry,” Mr. Moses notes.
The stakes are high, especially as generative AI allows criminals to reproduce voices or even create so-called “deepfake” videos to trick advisors or clients into believing they’re
talking to someone they know and trust.
“It’s not something we’ve seen in our business yet, but I make sure our client service team is aware that someone can clone a client’s voice now,” Mr. Nicola says.
He adds that advisory teams have processes in place to address these dangers, such as question-and-answer protocols involving information only advisors and clients know.
As well, for any transaction request prompted by a client phone call, virtual chat or e-mail, advisors often verify by contacting the client using a number on file, he adds.
Cindy Marques, co-founder, chief executive officer and certified financial planner at Money MakeCents Inc. in Toronto, says fraud risk is frequently on her radar.
“My inbox is constantly inundated with phishing e-mails that are posing as my employer or reputable services that I use,” says Ms. Marques, also director, financial planning and
education, at Open Access Ltd., which provides employer plan group retirement benefits.
An equal concern is for clients, who could receive e-mails or be contacted in other ways by fraudsters impersonating Ms. Marques.
“At a quick glance, they would have no reason to question me for asking them about sensitive financial information, as this comes up during our planning process often,” she says.
In her view, the industry as a whole must up its game with ever-tightening processes around sharing sensitive data while educating clients and industry members.
“If data are being requested in a manner that is too casual or outside of the usual methods, this is an indication of fraud,” Ms. Marques says, noting she often reminds clients about this
too.
That said, AI helps firms weed out many fraud attempts before they reach a victim, Mr. Moses says. “But we must continue to play a cat-and-mouse game and keep advancing because
the attackers are always going to.”

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

82/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Much is at stake given that the wealth management industry is built on trust, Mr. Zelvin says. AI tools – when used criminally – make it difficult to determine real from fake.
Increasingly, it will be hard to discern “between the good and the bad actors.”
The relationship between individual advisors and clients will play a crucial role, including having the questions and answers only they know, as mentioned earlier.
“It’s sort of like a kidnapping where you need proof of life,” Mr. Zelvin says.
Yet, with social media, including LinkedIn, even these processes are not unassailable, Mr. Moses cautions.
“I don’t provide much information about myself in public view because it will be used for spear-phishing,” he says.
“This has been a problem for a while, but generative AI makes it much more efficient for attackers.”
In the end, the best defence may be one as old as the industry itself: in-person meetings.
At least technology is not yet at the point at which life-like androids are a reality. “When we get to that point, it’s my plan to become a beachcomber,” Mr. Moses says.
For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: With the rise of AI fraud, wealth management firms caught in a ‘cat-and-mouse game’
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/advisor-news/article-with-the-rise-of-ai-fraud-wealth-management-firms-caught-in-a-cat-and/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240313ek3d000gp

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

83/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

‘From hype to reality': Scientists and developers seek to leverage AI's power to accelerate the discovery of new drugs
By IVAN SEMENIUK

1413 words
8 January 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Petrina Kamya may be a biochemist, but the research and development centre she runs in Montreal is conspicuously devoid of lab coats, test tubes or chemicals.
Instead, the newly opened facility consists of rows of computer stations where she and a team of 14 developers are working to harness the power of artificial intelligence to
accelerate the search for life-saving drugs.
The centre is part of Insilico Medicine, a biotech company that was founded in the United States and has its headquarters in Hong Kong. When the company expanded its research
efforts, it chose Montreal.
“I know the potential here," said Dr. Kamya, Insilico's global head of AI platforms, who has lived in Montreal since she was teenager. “The idea is to grow and to become an integral part
of the ecosystem."
The ecosystem blends the city's deep roots in medical research with its status as a launch pad for the AI boom. The latter stems from pioneering work by scientists affiliated with Mila,
formerly the Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms.
As a young scientist, Dr. Kamya watched as machine learning evolved from its rudimentary beginnings into applications as complex and powerful as ChatGPT . Now, her aim is to
facilitate AI's leap into the drug-discovery arena – where the challenge lies in knowing which potential therapeutics are worth pursuing.
This is essential in the pharmaceutical industry, where developing and testing a drug candidate can take years of effort and billions of dollars of investment. Any shortcut that AI can
offer could be a game changer .
Insilico is among the companies that are leading in the quest. It has 31 drugs under development, including one aimed at idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a rare lung disease.
A Phase 2 clinical trial of the drug is now under way.
The algorithms the company uses are not simply sifting through the myriad of possibilities to find molecules that show a beneficial effect. Rather, Dr. Kamya said, they employ a
“multimodal" approach that includes taking in results from published literature and grant applications to spot promising candidates.
But she cautioned that expectations for AI-guided drugs should be tempered with a strong dose of reality.
“What's been shown is that we can get to the clinic faster than typical drug discovery companies by leveraging AI," Dr.
Kamya said. “Now the challenge is proving the performance of these AI-derived drugs in the clinic."
Artificial intelligence gained prominence as a biomedical tool in November, 2020, when AlphaFold 2, an algorithm developed by British-based Google DeepMind, was the runaway
winner of a competition called Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction , or CASP.
The competition requires candidates to predict the three-dimensional shapes of proteins based on their genetic sequences.
Proteins are the building blocks of all living organisms and their shapes are crucial to biological function and to understanding disfunction in the case of a genetically linked disease.
It can take a research team years to deduce the structure of a single protein using conventional methods. Since it debuted, AlphaFold 2 has predicted more than 200 million.
Though it is fundamentally a computer science project, AlphaFold 2 has swept up major medical awards, including Canada's prestigious Gairdner Award in 2023, and it is considered a
likely candidate for the Nobel Prize.
Yet, when it comes to developing effective treatments, AlphaFold 2 is only the preamble. This is because even when a protein has been implicated in a disease, it remains a lock
without a key unless a molecule can be found that will bind to it and deter its harmful effects.
“The next logical step would be the ability to predict how proteins interact with small, drug-like molecules," said Cheryl Arrowsmith, a senior researcher at Toronto's Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre and a lab director with the Structural Genomics Consortium, an international effort to pinpoint the causes of disease. “Ultimately, what we would like to do is have early
drug discovery be largely computational."
This is where AI-guided drug discovery faces a significant barrier, Dr. Arrowsmith said, because of a dearth of public data that can be used to train an algorithm to know what molecules
to look for.
The problem goes to the fundamental relationship between data and performance that made the AI revolution possible.
ChatGPT took the world by storm in large part because its natural language algorithm could learn from reams of text available on the internet. AlphaFold 2 was trained on 100,000
protein shapes that were previously confirmed by scientists and available in a public database. There is no parallel repository to serve as a classroom for a drug-discovery algorithm.
Instead, relevant information is dispersed and often proprietary.
Dr. Arrowsmith said the hurdle has led the consortium to launch a competition, modelled after CASP, to encourage and identify successful approaches to finding new drugs using
computational tools.
Known as the CACHE chalthera lenge, the initiative is set up to provide competitors with a target – a protein that is known to be involved in a particular disease – and then evaluate
their ability to find small molecules or “hits" that interact with that protein and that can be investigated further as potential therapies. The competition has been run as a series of
overlapping challenges every four months, with each challenge lasting two years. Results from the first challenge – finding hits for a protein associated with Parkinson's disease – are
set to be released this month.
Matthieu Schapira, a professor of pharmacology at the University of Toronto who leads the effort, said the challenge provides a way to compare different methods of hit-finding to reveal
where genuine progress is being made.
“Our hope is to set the stage for a breakthrough in computer-based drug discovery," he said.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

84/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Since its launch, the competition has become a project of Conscience AI, a notfor-profit organization partly funded by the federal government to advance computer-aided drug
discovery for neglected diseases. A key aspect of the organization's mandate is to make results and data open to all to improve the overall success rate of the field as rapidly as
possible.
“The truth about AI drug discovery is that it's not very good yet," said Ryan Merkley, the organization's chief executive. “I think the thing that gets us from hype to reality is finding ways
to do really good iterative development and ideally learn from each other."
That thinking is echoed by those who are taking part in CACHE, including Molecular Forecaster Inc., a computational chemistry company based in Montreal that has participated in
each challenge so far. Josh Pottel, the chief executive, said there is a certain risk in participating if the company is seen to perform poorly in relation to others, but that risk is balanced
with the opportunity to make scientific contributions and gain expertise.
“We get to improve algorithms, we get to learn from data that's rigorous and homogeneous, done by world experts," he said. “It's very much a give and take."
At larger scale, several of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies have announced partnerships with technology companies to claim a slice of what Bloomberg this year declared
a US$50-billion opportunity. Those who work at the forefront of AI are well aware of the growing interest.
Doina Precup, a McGill University professor who also leads the Montreal office of Google DeepMind, said that health- and drug-related projects are increasing as a share of her own
work and, more broadly, across Montreal's AI sector.
Dr. Precup specializes in a form of AI called reinforcement learning, which is designed to improve its performance through trial and error. This makes it is particularly amenable to drug
discovery, a type of problem where the desired solution is usually unknown. In cases where training data are insufficient, researchers are using the approach to develop algorithms that
can do more with less.
Beyond technical improvements, Dr.
Precup said, an additional factor driving the progress of AI-guided drug discovery is the enthusiasm of younger researchers who are entering the field with the goal of putting their
expertise to use in a way that benefits people.
“They want to do something that matters," Dr. Precup said. “Where they see that AI is going to make a positive difference for somebody."
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240108ek180000b

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

85/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
1883 words
26 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Lightspeed Commerce Inc. ( LSPD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/LSPD-T/] ) saw further gains in response to the news it is officially up for sale
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-lightspeed-commerce-latest-canadian-tech-company-put-up-for-sale/] , the latest in a series of Canadian tech companies to consider
going private following a stock market slump after pandemic restrictions were lifted.
The board of the Montreal-based point-of-sale software vendor has hired U.S.-based investment bank JP Morgan Chase & Co. to run a strategic review of the business that includes a
potential sale to a rival tech company or private equity fund, according to a source familiar with the situation.
Lightspeed is in the early stages of the strategic review and there are no assurances the company will be sold, the source said. The Globe and Mail agreed not to name the source
because they are not permitted to speak for the company. Reuters first reported that Lightspeed is up for sale.
On Wednesday, Lightspeed’s Toronto Stock Exchange-listed shares jumped and closed up by 13 per cent on news of a possible takeover. The company’s market capitalization is
$3.2-billion. Lightspeed sells transaction software to retailers, restaurants, golf courses and hotels.
The company is in the midst of a strategic shift, after the board replaced chief executive officer Jean Paul Chauvet in February with founder and former chief executive officer Dax
Dasilva. After retaking control, Mr. Dasilva moved to increase Lightspeed’s sales at a sharper pace while still maintaining a commitment to improve its bottom line.
- Andrew Willis and Sean Silcoff
National Bank of Canada ( NA-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NA-T/] ) was up after saying it has cleared a key regulatory hurdle in its proposed
acquisition [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-national-bank-unveils-offer-to-buy-canadian-western-bank-in-deal/] of Canadian Western Bank ( CWB-T
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CWB-T/] ).
The Montreal-based bank says it has received the Competition Bureau’s clearance for the deal.
The transaction still requires approval by the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions and the minister of finance.
Canadian Western shareholders voted to approve the deal [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canadian-western-bank-shareholders-approve-national-bank-takeover/]
earlier this month.
National Bank announced an all-stock deal to buy Canadian Western earlier this year in a proposal that valued the Edmonton-based bank at about $5 billion.
It has said its acquisition of Canadian Western will significantly expand its western footprint and create a stronger national competitor.
Toronto-Dominion Bank ( TD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TD-T/] ) increased after it named Andy Bregenzer and Jill Gateman as co-heads of its U.S.
commercial banking business, replacing Chris Giamo, who retired earlier this year.
The appointments come as Canada’s second-biggest lender shakes up its top management in preparation for expected U.S. fines stemming from regulatory scrutiny of its anti-money
laundering protocols.
Last week, TD announced CEO Bharat Masrani will leave the bank next year and hand over the top job to Ray Chun [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-td-banks-nextceo-is-not-a-known-commodity-on-bay-street/?cmpid=rss] , the head of its Canadian banking unit.
The bank reported its first loss in decades in August after earmarking $2.6-billion to cover the potentially hefty penalties.
The U.S. regulatory probes relate to allegations that Chinese drug traffickers used the bank to launder at least $650-million from 2016 through 2021, and an employee took a bribe to
facilitate laundering of drug money.
These regulatory probes come on the heels of TD Bank’s termination of its $13.4-billion acquisition of Tennessee-based First Horizon in May 2023, a deal that would have significantly
expanded its network in the Southwestern United States.
Mr. Bregenzer, a nearly 30-year industry veteran, has been with TD for two decades. In his new role, he will focus on the regional commercial banks, including small businesses, in the
U.S.
Ms. Gateman will lead TD’s national commercial banking effort in the country and continue to partner with TD Securities and TD Cowen to deliver advisory and investment banking
services to its commercial banking clients.
Ms. Gateman joined the Canadian lender in 2023 to lead its middle-market, asset-based and sponsor-backed finance business segments.
Micron Technology ( MU-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MU-Q/] ) surged on Thursday, leading a rally in chip stocks after its strong revenue forecast
signaled robust demand for semiconductors used to power generative AI technology .
The company, whose high-bandwidth memory chips (HBM) are used in Nvidia’s popular artificial intelligence processors, was set to add more than US$17.5-billion to its market
value.
Strong demand for HBM chips has helped Micron offset inventory buildups in other areas such as the personal computer market.
The company delivered its best quarterly revenue growth in a decade in the fourth quarter ended Aug. 29 and its forecast for the current period was widely above Wall Street estimates.
The earnings also lifted shares of Nvidia ( NVDA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NVDA-Q/] ) and Broadcom ( AVGO-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AVGO-Q/] ) as well as other chip firms, including AMD ( AMD-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMD-Q] ) and Intel ( INTC-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/INTC-Q] ).

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

86/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

“The firm (Micron) benefits from a broad and strong up-cycle in memory chip demand, aided by AI-related demand,” Morningstar analysts said in a note.
Strong pricing for HBM chips is expected to help Micron’s gross margins, which were earlier pressured by an expensive ramp-up of its HBM manufacturing capacity.
The company said it expects adjusted gross margin of about 39.5 per cent for the first quarter ending November, compared to estimates of 37.7 per cent.
North American miners, including Hudbay Minerals Inc. ( HBM-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/HBM-T/] ), First Quantum Minerals Ltd. ( FM-T
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/FM-T/] ) and Teck Resources Inc. ( TECK.B-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TECK-BBM-T/] ),
surged after China vowed to offer “necessary fiscal spending” to meet an economic growth target after its central bank’s aggressive policy easing measures earlier in the week.
“Chinese stimulus measures increasingly look like a comprehensive package. Earlier this week there were rate cuts and macro prudential measures, now they are talking about adding
a fiscal stimulus which every economist was saying was the missing link,” said Yvan Mamalet, senior economist and strategist at Kleinwort Hambros.
Reuters reported separately that China plans to issue special sovereign bonds worth about 2 trillion yuan (US$284-billion) this year primarily to stimulate consumption.
The materials sector came under focus as gold prices edged higher on mounting expectations of another U.S. rate cut this year. Copper prices rose on more stimulus hopes from
China.
The optimism also spread to U.S.-listed Chinese firms, including Alibaba ( BABA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BABA-N] ), Li Auto ( LI-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/LI-Q/] ) and JD.com ( JD-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/JD-Q/] ).
Southwest Airlines ( LUV-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/LUV-N/] ) surged after it unveiled a slew of measures including partnerships with international
carriers, vacation packages, and sale-and-leaseback transactions of aircraft to turn around its business and boost profit margins.
The initiatives came as the U.S. carrier faces pressure from an activist investor to shake up its management.
Southwest said the measures would help produce at least a 10-per-cent operating margin, 15-per-cent return on its invested capital and more than US$1-billion in free cash flow by
2027. It also announced a new US$2.5-billion share buyback program.
The pioneering low-cost airline once boasted a record 47 consecutive years of profit before the COVID-19 pandemic. But aircraft delivery delays by planemaker Boeing’s, excess
capacity in the domestic airline industry and post-pandemic travel patterns have all combined to depress earnings.
Its passenger volumes are running below pre-pandemic levels and shares have lost about 40 per cent of their value in the past three years. It has downgraded its outlook at least eight
times in the past 20 months despite booming travel demand and analysts expect profit in 2024 to plunge about 83 per cent from a year ago.
As investors and analysts gather in Dallas on Thursday for Southwest’s first public investor meeting since 2022, they want a credible strategy and timeline to restore its long-term
profitability.
The stakes are high. Activist investor Elliott Investment Management has launched a campaign to oust CEO Bob Jordan and replace two-thirds of Southwest’s board of directors,
blaming them for the airline’s underperformance. Elliott plans to request a special shareholder meeting as soon as next week to force the changes .
IT services major Accenture ( ACN-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ACN-N] ) unveiled a US$4-billion share buyback on Thursday, closing the fourth
quarter with better-than-expected results thanks to strong demand for its services that help businesses adopt generative AI technology .
Accenture’s generative AI business has been outpacing the growth in its other core businesses, as organizations look for automation to curtail costs and improve efficiency.
Generative AI bookings have shown robust quarter-on-quarter acceleration for the past four quarters, reaching a total of US$3-billion for the year.
Shares of Accenture rose on Thursday, rebounding from a near 4-per-cent decline over the year. The tech-heavy Nasdaq , on the other hand, rose 20.4 per cent this year.
Excluding items, the company earned US$2.79 per share, beating estimates of US$2.78 per share, according to LSEG data.
However, the company’s forecast for growth between 3 per cent and 6 per cent missed the midpoint of the analysts’ average estimate of 5.9% growth.
While analysts expect a turnaround in IT services, the expectations for next year remain modest. Analysts at JP Morgan earlier said they were not as bullish for the sector as they
were this time last year, adding that clients will continue to withhold discretionary spending on projects.
Ahead of Accenture’s results, Morgan Stanley said that overall IT services demand will likely be generally slower than expected in the coming quarters.
Indian IT services company Tata Consultancy Services slightly beat its first-quarter revenue estimates and said it is “too early” to predict sustained growth in future quarters.
Facebook owner Meta Platforms ( META-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/META-Q/] ) saw gains a day after it showed off its first working prototype of
augmented-reality glasses, called Orion, during its annual Connect conference on Wednesday, as the California company sketched out its aspirations for products that would bring the
virtual world into the real one.
“This is the physical world with holograms overlaid on it,” Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said after pulling out the chunky black glasses from a metal case dramatically brought to him
on stage.
“For now, I think the right way to look at Orion is as a time machine,” he said. “These glasses exist, they are awesome and they are a glimpse of a future that I think is going to be
pretty exciting.”
Meta also showed off new AI chatbot capabilities for its services and a new Quest mixed-reality headset.
Meta shares registered a record closing high on Wednesday, up 0.9 per cent at US$568.31.
The Orion glasses are made of magnesium alloy and powered by custom silicon designed by Meta. Users will be able to interact with the glasses through hand-tracking, voice and
wrist-based neural interface. Meta plans to work on making it smaller, sleeker and more low-cost before releasing it to consumers later on, Mr. Zuckerberg said.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-thursday-september-26-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240926ek9q00209

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

87/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

news/gta

'These things could get smarter than us': Toronto Nobel laureate warned of risks of AI from it's earliest applications
www.thestar.com
1278 words
8 October 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Canada gained a new Nobel laureate Tuesday when Geoffrey Hinton, a University of Toronto computer scientist, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for co-discovering machine
learning breakthroughs that underpin today's artificial intelligence applications
- advances he himself has warned carry dangerous risks for society.
"I'm flabbergasted," Hinton said when reached by the Nobel committee on the phone Tuesday. Hinton was co-awarded the prize with
Princeton University researcher John Hopfield, who also made early breakthroughs; the two will split the prize of 11 million Swedish kronor (about $1.45 million Canadian dollars)
equally.
Hinton toiled for years in relative obscurity in a field few thought would yield results, subsisting on modest Canadian grants, until he and two students published a breakthrough in 2012.
The trio were soon snapped up by Google, where Hinton worked for many years, splitting his time between the tech giant's California headquarters and his home in Toronto's Annex
neighbourhood.
Last year, however, Hinton quit Google in order to speak more freely about what he sees as the growing dangers of artificial intelligence . The news sent shock waves across the
industry and the broader public, launching the dialogue about "AI safety" into the mainstream.
Here's everything you need to know about the Nobel winner.
A family of scientists
Hinton was born in the U.K. to a family of accomplished scientists: His paternal great-great-grandparents were the mathematician
Mary Everest
Boole
and the logician George
Boole, whose invention of Boolean algebra underpins modern computing. His father was an entomologist, describing many new species of beetles, and his mother was a math teacher.
He recalls her telling him it was OK if he didn't get a PhD, in a tone that clearly suggested it was not.
Hinton switched majors several times as an undergraduate student, trying to find a subject that would allow him to understand the human brain, and by extension the human mind. But
he found philosophy, physiology and psychology all unsatisfactory to the task, though he eventually graduated from Cambridge University
with a degree from the psychology department.
As a PhD student, his adviser allowed him to indulge his interests in the then-unpopular "neural networks," algorithmic models designed to mimic the structure of the human brain. As
the committee that awards the Nobel Prizes noted, however, "some discouraging theoretical results caused many researchers to suspect that these neural networks would never be of
any real use." That didn't seem to deter Hinton, who earned his doctorate in 1978 from Edinburgh University.
A pull to Canada
After getting his PhD, Hinton bumped around various American universities. But most of the funding for artificial intelligence research at the time came from the U.S. Defense
Department, and Hinton was deeply concerned about the technology being utilized for weapons on the battlefield.
As a result, he came to Canada in 1987, both to avoid entangling his research with the U.S. military and because
he was attracted by a position that offered the maximum amount of time to pursue basic research. Hinton and other AI pioneers from this time also credit the support of CIFAR, a
Canadian-based research organization that nurtured research into the field starting in that decade.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which awards the Nobel Prize, cited Hopfield and Hinton's work in the 1980s that established the foundations for artificial neural networks.
But after a burst of enthusiasm in this period tied to these breakthroughs, interest receded again when the systems faltered on more difficult tasks, ushering in an "AI winter."
Hinton, toiling away in his very modest office near College and McCaul Streets on the U of T campus, was unphased by these struggles in real-world applications.
"There is a lot of pressure to make things more applied; I think it's a big mistake," Hinton told the Star in 2015. "In the long run, curiosity-driven research just works better," he said.
"Real breakthroughs come from people focusing on what they're excited about."
Breakthroughs
Hinton and his graduate students began publishing research in the 2010s that sparked renewed interest in the field. The big breakthrough came in 2012, when Hinton and two of his
students,
Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever, entered an image recognition contest. The neural network they built was so good at correctly identifying images
- a person, a cat - that it leapt over the previous best-performing algorithms, taking a big stride towards the success rate of humans.
Google snapped up the trio of U of T researchers, paying millions to acquire the company they formed. For the next decade, Hinton would spend part of the year at the company's
Mountain View, California headquarters, working on a team then called Google Brain, where the company's research on artificial intelligence was underway.
That decade saw a kind of arms race for artificial intelligence talent across the biggest tech giants, who snapped up the then-small pool of researchers. Many of Hinton's former
students are now working in the upper ranks of companies like Meta and Apple. The neural networks Hinton and his colleagues developed now underpin many of the computer tasks
we take for granted, like the ability to identify which rare species of wildflower you've just taken a picture of on your phone, or automatically translate speech from a different language.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

88/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Ilya Sutskever, Hinton's former graduate student who was originally snapped up by Google, left the company after three years to co-found OpenAI. The company launched ChatGPT ,
an artificial intelligence chatbot, in 2022, which immediately stirred both huge interest and concern for its humanlike conversational abilities.
Warnings
Hinton had always been concerned about the marriage of artificial intelligence and military weapons, and had believed that the technology risked replacing human jobs with bots and
algorithms. But he thought these risks would not pose a real threat to society for many decades, because the algorithms were still not smart enough.
That all changed with what he saw as improvements in AI's capacity to mimic or even outperform human thinking. In May 2023, Hinton said he was leaving Google in order to speak
more freely about what he saw as these serious risks.
Hinton has enumerated many concerns about the risks of AI since then, from improving surveillance to even existential threats to humanity. At this year's Collision Conference in
Toronto, he told an audience that "As I left Google, I figured I could just warn ... that in the long run, these things could get smarter than us and might go rogue. That's not science
fiction...That's real."
Google, OpenAI, and other major players in the field insist that they care deeply about AI safety. But Hinton and others have insisted that governments need to institute better guardrails
on the technology, and that we as a society need to have deeper conversations about these risks.
The Academy cited these risks when awarding the Nobel on Tuesday.
"While machine learning has enormous benefits, its rapid development has also raised concerns about our future ,"
Ellen Moons, a member of the Nobel committee at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, said.
"Collectively, humans carry the responsibility for using this new technology in a safe and ethical way for the greatest benefit of humankind."
With files from The Canadian Press
AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton backstage at the Collision Conference, in Toronto in June. British-Canadian cognitive psychologist and computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton, known as the "godfather of AI."
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241008eka8000h6

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

89/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

opinion/contributors

Big tech wants the work of Canadian writers and publishers because it's valuable. So they should pay
Glenn Rollans
941 words
20 July 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The federal government recently wrapped up a public consultation on generative artificial intelligence (AI) and copyright, probing how AI might affect creators. The consultation
generated 98 submissions.
No surprise, tech promoters - multinational giants, small startups, and others who see the potential of AI to reshape our economy and generate enormous profits - came down firmly on
the side of unfettered AI. They say that the text and data mining activities necessary to train generative AI systems should not be subject to disclosure, permission, or compensation.
Rightsholders, those who create and develop the works being mined for this training, do not matter in their extractive business model.
Who are these rightsholders? Authors, illustrators, publishers, visual artists, musicians, performers, and many, many other creators.
I'm a working book publisher based in Edmonton and I own two companies, a higher education press and a literary house. What I care most about in this conversation is the cultural
impact of AI, including the stress and harm it causes for the important and fragile Canadian books sector.
Authentic Canadian voices in writing and publishing are part of our national project as Canadians. Beyond nurturing and promoting uniquely Canadian literature, Canadian publishers
also help deliver Canadian perspectives in education, by building in our languages and cultures, our values, our curricula, and our history. We help record and make public the results
of Canadian scholarship.
For Canadians, visitors and readers around the world, we help build knowledge and appreciation of our amazing and vast country, its peoples, and its regions. We provide foundations
for serious discussions of politics and public issues. We are welded to the life of the country wherever you look: schools, the arts, universities, local economies, tourism, or the political
arena.
Despite the hype around AI, Canadian authors and publishers can't truly be replaced by generative AIs. Unlike living Canadian writers and publishers, AI programs cannot act in good
faith or bad, they have nothing at stake, they have no experience. They have no community. They have no family. They can neither tell the truth nor lie. They can neither understand nor
fail to understand. They have no nationality, and when they seem to have nationality, it is not Canadian.
While a relatively small industry in dollar volume, Canada's book sector punches far above its weight in authority, quality, prestige, and durability. That's why even the czars of big
technology want to see their biographies and memoirs in book form. That's why AI developers want to "scrape" our works for their large language models . They recognize our value
and want to make it their property.
As a small-business owner working in Canada's books sector, I'm constantly aware that I operate on a knife's edge, in a hostile business environment. Margins are slim, profits are
elusive and competition is intense. Yet, I'm also asked to supply the products of our work and our authors' work to large organizations for free, big tech among them.
While some AI developers hurry to hide their tracks, it has already been well demonstrated that many have copied vast quantities of copyright-protected works into their training
databases
- without permission, without credit or attribution, without compensation, without time limits.
The reason big tech wants our works is because our works are valuable. The reason they're valuable is that publishers and authors invest our time, skills and money into creating them,
one by one. Authors and publishers cannot afford to work for free. We can't afford to compete with our own work, swallowed and then coughed back up by generative AIs. We have a
breaking point.
It's entirely possible that the revenues AI developers intend to suck from our sector in Canada - built on our work, used without our permission - will be our breaking point.
There should be no
text and data mining exception for AI developers in Canadian law. AI developers can afford to pay for what they use. In a functioning marketplace, we should be able to make our works
available under licence; they should not be able to take them for free.
Along with properly licensing future uses of our works, perhaps it's time to discuss whether the AI sector should make a continuing financial commitment to Canadian cultural
industries and the publishing and writing sectors in particular, the same way the streaming platforms will now be required to contribute to Canadian film, music, news organizations, TV
and radio. Big tech says that having copied our work, they can't uncopy it, ever. This kind of behaviour must come with a cost.
We face a crossroads, where generative AI developers can engage properly with the nations and cultures that make up Canada or continue to steamroll them and exploit their work.
Arguing against big tech is a David and Goliath challenge for authors and publishers, but it's one we have to face, because we believe that our works, our authors, and our readers
deserve to be treated with respect.
"Despite the hype around AI, Canadian authors and publishers can't truly be replaced by generative AIs. Unlike living Canadian writers and publishers, AI programs cannot act in good faith or bad, they
have nothing at stake, they have no experience. They have no community. They have no family. They can neither tell the truth nor lie. They can neither understand nor fail to understand. They have no
nationality, and when they seem to have nationality, it is not Canadian," writes Glenn Rollans.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240720ek7k00096

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

90/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

U.S. news non-profit sues OpenAI, Microsoft over use of its content on AI platforms
By SARAH PARVINI, MATT O’BRIEN
593 words
28 June 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B5
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The Center for Investigative Reporting said Thursday it has sued ChatGPT maker OpenAI and its closest business partner, Microsoft Corp., marking a new front in the news
industry's fight against unauthorized use of its content on artificial-intelligence platforms.
The non-profit, which produces Mother Jones and Reveal, said that OpenAI used its content without permission and without offering compensation, violating copyrights on the
organization's journalism . The lawsuit, filed in a New York federal court, describes OpenAI's business as “built on the exploitation of copyrighted works" and focuses on how
AIgenerated summaries of articles threaten publishers.
“It's immensely dangerous," Monika Bauerlein, the non-profit's chief executive, told the Associated Press. “Our existence relies on users finding our work valuable and deciding to
support it."
Ms. Bauerlein said that “when people can no longer develop that relationship with our work, when they no longer encounter Mother Jones or Reveal, then their relationship is with the AI
tool."
That, she said, could “cut the entire foundation of our existence as an independent newsroom out from under us" while also threatening the future of other news organizations.
OpenAI and Microsoft didn't respond to requests for comment Thursday.
The lawsuit is the latest against OpenAI and Microsoft to land at Manhattan's federal court, where the companies are already battling a series of other copyright lawsuits from The New
York Times, other media outlets and bestselling authors such as John Grisham, Jodi Picoult and George R.R. Martin. The companies also face a separate case in San Francisco's
federal court.
Some news organizations have chosen to collaborate rather than fight with OpenAI by signing deals to get compensated for sharing news content that can be used to train its AI
systems. The latest to do so is Time, which announced Thursday that OpenAI will get access to its “extensive archives from the last 101 years."
OpenAI and other major AI developers don't typically disclose their data sources but have argued that taking troves of publicly accessible online text, images and other media to train
their AI systems is protected by the fair-use doctrine of American copyright law. CIR's lawsuit says a data set that OpenAI has acknowledged using to build an earlier version of its
chatbot technology contained thousands of links to the website of Mother Jones, a 48-year-old print magazine that's been publishing online since 1993.
Last summer, more than 4,000 writers signed a letter to the CEOs of OpenAI and other tech companies accusing them of exploitative practices in building chatbots.
“It's not a free resource for these AI companies to ingest and make money on," Ms. Bauerlein said of news media . “They pay for office space, they pay for electricity, they pay salaries
for their workers. Why would the content that they ingest be the only thing that they don't [pay for]?" The AP is among the news organizations that have made licensing deals over the
past year with OpenAI.
The lawsuit from CIR, also known for its Reveal podcast and radio show, outlines the expense of producing investigative journalism and warns that losing control of copyrighted
content will result in less revenue and even fewer reporters to tell important stories in “today's paltry media landscape."
“With fewer investigative news stories told, the cost to democracy will be enormous," the lawsuit says.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240628ek6s0001j

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

91/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

news/canada

What an AI image of a Holocaust survivor can teach us about remembrance
Katharine Lake Berz
1806 words
25 February 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

LOS ANGELES-One recent day in Los Angeles, Holocaust survivor Pinchas Gutter answered questions about his family's murder by the Nazis.
Sitting comfortably among a small audience, Gutter's eyes grew sombre as he described his parents' murder, his back-breaking work as an 11-year-old slave, and eating insects to
survive. He recalled with emotion his last glimpse of his twin sister's blond braid before she vanished forever.
But when asked how he felt about the present war in the Middle East, Gutter's expression went blank and he was unable to answer.
That's because Gutter was not in Los Angeles in 2024 but was speaking as a life-sized artificial intelligence image recorded in 2014 at the University of Southern California Shoah
Foundation Museum.
The real Gutter, a 91-year-old Holocaust educator and frequent guest lecturer, lives in Toronto and was the first survivor recorded in interactive AI by the USC foundation, which was
founded by Steven Spielberg, for its innovative Dimensions in Testimony.
The project, which is racing against time to preserve the memories of survivors who are now more than 80 years old, uses advanced recording techniques and natural language
processing to capture survivors' stories in extensive interviews. AI technology then enables users to interact with a life-sized image of Gutter that can be questioned and will respond
much as if talking to the real person.
"I tell my story for the purpose of improving humanity drop by drop by drop. Like a drop of water falls on a stone and erodes it," Gutter's AI image said, "to make the world a better
place."
For educators and technology experts who spoke with the Star, Holocaust memorial projects, like USC's, are an important example of AI's transformative force for good.
But the advantages of AI and evolving technology for historians may also be its Achilles heel. As much technology can help to bring the past to life, it can also distort and twist it to
devastating effect.
From its beginnings as a mid-20th-century theory that machines could use human-like reason to solve problems and make decisions, AI now enhances many aspects of our daily lives,
from virtual assistants like Siri and Alexa to recommendation systems on streaming platforms like Netflix to advanced medical diagnostic systems.
But AI deepfake videos - which distort images to feature real people saying or doing things they never did - are now easy for cybercriminals to create and use to sow chaos on facts.
"Before you needed a PhD and fancy graphics and video editing software" to make deepfake videos, said Jimmy Lin, a professor at the David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
at the University of Waterloo. "But now you just download an app."
In January 2023, AI startup ElevenLabs launched a tool giving users the ability to create new synthetic voices for text-to-speech audio or clone somebody's voice. Just days after the
tool went live, a video of former child actor Emma Watson reading Adolf Hitler's "Mein Kampf" and wearing a Nazi uniform was circulated on 4chan, an anonymous message board
known for spreading hateful content.
Similar deepfakes have already marked the U.S. presidential election, with robocalls of an apparent AI-generated deepfake of President Joe Biden's voice discouraging voters from
attending the New Hampshire Democratic primary. Deepfakes are also
expanding the reach of pornography
with multiple free websites capable of "undressing" women in just minutes, according to Daniel Siegel, a graduate student at Columbia University who researches how AI is being
exploited for malicious purposes.
Recently there has also been a proliferation in the use of AI image generators to negatively depict Jewish people in relation to the war in Gaza, said Siegel.
Muslim communities have also been rocked by anti-Islamic sentiment since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, but it is antisemitism that has been the focus of hate-filled, far-right groups using
AI tools , according to Memetica, a threat analysis company that monitors online hate.
"People who spread hate (online) reach audiences better than we do," said USC Shoah Foundation executive director Robert Williams, in a panel discussion last September. "We need
to figure it out, and we need to figure it out quick."
But many organizations like the Shoah Foundation are already hard at work doing just that. With most Holocaust survivors now in their 90s, archivists, historians and museums are
turning to immersive technologies to preserve their stories for future generations.
For instance, Toronto's Holocaust Museum and the National Holocaust Monument in Ottawa are leveraging technology to customize first-person accounts, artifacts, photos and
documents and to offer virtual reality experiences.
These immersive exhibits "help people see themselves reflected in the history," said Michelle Fishman, director of marketing and communications for the Toronto Holocaust Museum.
Making survivor stories interactive preserves important historical truths, bridges the gap between generations and ensures that the lessons of the past remain accessible and engaging
for future generations. And leaders of these projects as well as technology experts told the Star that while more protective measures are still needed, the benefits of using AI to
preserve history still far exceed its dangers.
Survivors themselves seem to have little fear about embracing technology to preserve their memories. The USC Shoah Foundation has collected 56,000 audio-visual Holocaust
testimonies in 44 languages from 65 countries.
Building on this success, the foundation has now expanded its reach to educate on the horrors of other genocides by collecting testimonies from survivors and witnesses of the
Armenian genocide during the First World War, the 1937 Nanjing Massacre in China, the Cambodian genocide of the 1970s, the Guatemalan genocide of the early 1980s, the 1994
genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, the ongoing South Sudan civil war, the Central African Republic conflict of 2012 and anti-Rohingya mass violence of 2017.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

92/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

In a related project, the final shattering of Jewish life in Germany on Kristallnacht, "the night of broken glass," is being memorialized through virtual reality by the Holocaust Claims
Conference in partnership with USC and Meta.
The immersive experience, to be released later this year, features Kristallnacht survivor Charlotte Knobloch, 91, who walks users through her ravaged Jewish neighbourhood in Munich
as she did with her father on Nov. 9, 1938, when she was six. Viewers will experience first hand how ordinary citizens turned on their Jewish neighbours, burning synagogues, looting
Jewish businesses and vandalizing their hospitals, homes and schools.
For Knobloch, former president of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, fighting antisemitism through projects like this one is a matter of life and death. Speaking in German in a
Zoom interview with the Star from her Munich home, the great-grandmother said she has needed a security detail for many years because she has had multiple threats on her life by
neo-Nazis.
"The security situation is worse than ever, and it is very scary," she said.
Knobloch, who survived the Holocaust by hiding with a Catholic family in a small town, never forgot her Jewish roots and devoted herself to rebuilding a Jewish community in Germany.
"We need the commemoration to prepare for the future ," Knobloch said. "In five to 10 years, this generation will be gone. And it will be up to our descendants to ... make sure that we
don't forget these horrible crimes."
The advent of AI recording and storytelling by actual survivors is likely to make it much easier to reach new generations with the truth.
Although modern antisemitism and Holocaust denial are deeply painful for survivors, it often drives them to become involved in the projects that serve as an antidote to that denial.
To protect historical testimonies, scholars and technology companies are finding ways to authenticate genuine content and detect deepfakes.
Startup companies such as Reality Defender are scanning user-generated media to detect deepfakes and providing alerts to deepfake image manipulations, said Columbia University's
Daniel Siegel.
Industry alliances such as the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity are also helping by creating standards to certify the source and provenance of media. This allow
creators to create content that can't secretly be tampered with, Siegel said.
Working with these standards, Meta, an industry-leading provider of social media, committed to a major boost in protecting historical truths, in a Feb. 6 announcement. The company
said it will detect and label AI-generated images that users post to its Facebook, Instagram and Threads sites and could apply penalties to users who fail to label their own altered audio
and video content.
"When it comes to harmful content, the most important thing is that we are able to catch it and take action," the statement said.
Waterloo's Jimmy Lin sees the importance of these controls and oversight along with education to help people navigate and critique online information. If people can learn to consider
who is behind AI sources and reflect on different points of view, they will be less influenced by deepfakes, he said.
But there is no doubt for Lin that the ability to have an AI conversation with a Holocaust survivor like Pinchas Gutter is one of the best ways to counter deepfake attacks.
"This is a really novel and forward-looking use of generative AI technology . I think this is refreshing."
Pinchas Gutter agrees. He hopes using technology to share his story will help build tolerance and understanding in the world, he said in an online chat this week.
"We must ... accept different cultures and different religions and different ways of life, he said.
"I say Psalms, you read the Qur'an," he said. "Why can't we live together?"
At its best, AI's ability to keep truth powerfully alive through the experiences of witnesses may make that more possible, not less.
Toronto's Holocaust Museum, pictured, and the National Holocaust Monument in Ottawa are using technology to customize first-person accounts, artifacts, photos and documents and to offer virtual
reality experiences. Charlotte Knobloch, 91, in an immersive experience, to be released later this year, walks users through her ravaged Jewish neighbourhood in Munich as she did with her father on
Nov. 9, 1938, known as Kristallnacht, when she was six. Charlotte Knobloch, 91, a Jewich community leader in Germany, says "it will be up to our descendants to ... make sure that we don't forget these
horrible crimes." Holocaust survivor Howard Chandler interacting with the We Who Survived exhibit at the Toronto Holocaust Museum. At the USC Shoah Foundation in Los Angeles, an AI image of
Holocaust survivor Pinchas Gutter, recorded in 2014, answers questions about his family's murder by the Nazis.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240225ek2p000gq

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

93/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: Three signposts in the AI revolution; Also in today’s edition: Chinese stocks go haywire
Tim Shufelt
1012 words
9 October 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

It’s a bit misleading to say that artificial intelligence will shape the future since it’s already shaping the present. Today, we’re considering some of the ways AI is rapidly entrenching
itself in our lives, for good or ill. Either way, it’s too late to stop it! More on that below.
IN THE NEWS
* Housing developers say the federal government’s new mortgage policies will do little [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-mortgage-rules-new-home-construction/] to
kick-start demand for new homes.
* Payment processor Stripe Inc. says it won’t reduce [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-stripe-says-it-wont-reduce-merchant-fees-despite-ottawas-deals-with/]
merchant fees on its standard plans despite Ottawa’s recent deals with Visa and Mastercard that sought to lower transaction costs.
* The Toronto office of private mortgage lender Romspen Investment Corp. was searched [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-head-office-of-private-mortgage-lenderromspen-searched-by-revenu/] Tuesday by Revenu Québec as part of an investigation tied to the insolvency of one of Romspen’s borrowers.
* Inflation and higher interest rates have eroded [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-inflation-interest-rates-eroded-canadians-purchasing-power-since-2022/]
Canadians’ purchasing power since 2022, particularly for lower-income households.
IN FOCUS
A three-course meal of AI
The pace of AI news is so relentless these days, it can be difficult to even get a lay of the land. So, let’s take a closer look at three stories that speak to the current state of AI and how
this megatrend is unfolding.
1. The godfather
Nobody embodies the good and bad of AI more than Geoffrey Hinton, the University of Toronto computer scientist known as the “godfather of AI.” On Tuesday, Hinton became
Canada’s newest Nobel laureate when he was announced as the co-winner of the physics prize for his pioneering work on neural networks, which are algorithms that mimic the human
brain’s ability to learn. The awarding of the Nobel itself might be considered an acknowledgment of AI’s potential benefits to humankind. “I want to emphasize that AI is going to do
tremendous good,” Hinton told [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-canadas-geoffrey-hinton-ai-pioneer-co-wins-nobel-prize-in-physics-with/#comments] The Globe’s
science reporter Ivan Semeniuk, after learning of his Nobel win. “In areas like health care, it’s going to be amazing. That’s why its development is never going to be stopped. The real
question is, can we keep it safe?”
One of the many fascinating things about Hinton is how vocal he is about the dangers of the technology he helped conceive. He speaks of the threat to people’s livelihoods, the use of
AI in warfare, and the potential for machine sentience. As the technology evolves, the enormous rewards and existential risks will increasingly come into view. They are two sides of the
same coin.
2. The agents
Even as the world is still familiarizing itself with the applications of chatbots like ChatGPT , the next big thing is already upon us. AI agents take the chatbot model a step further, by
actually performing tasks on their own, rather than simply telling you how to do them, Joe Castaldo writes [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-still-working-out-the-kinksin-generative-ai-developers-rush-ahead/] . They could book flights, for example. Or revise documents. Imagine working alongside “AI colleagues.” It’s not far off.
The problem is, generative AI has a habit of glitching out now and then. It’s difficult to refine these models to a high level of reliability. So, it’s not hard to envision unpleasant scenarios
if agents are given too much autonomy. The lesson here is that new AI applications are going to continue to arise, well before the kinks have been worked out.
3. The subjects
Uber drivers in Ontario are now going to have their wages determined by an algorithm, rather than by an established compensation structure, Vanmala Subramaniam writes
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-uber-driver-pay-algorithm-ontario/] . The company said the new model will calculate ride prices based on things like time of day and
day of the week, demand and supply, the efficiency of the route a driver chooses to take and historical data from similar routes. Critics say the move exploits gig workers, who can no
longer count on predictable earnings for a certain amount of work. There is even a legal argument being made that algorithmic wages are discriminatory.
People are already seeing AI creep into their professional lives in ways that may not benefit them. In many ways, the technology is moving faster than our attempts to regulate it.
CHARTED
Easy come, easy go. Chinese-exposed stocks have become the talk of the investing world over the past two weeks, first for their explosive ascent, and now for their sudden reversion.
The Hong Kong market, for example, gained an impressive 27 per cent in a matter of days after China’s central bank unveiled a stimulus blitz designed to revive the country’s economy.
But sentiment soured when the government declined to follow suit on the fiscal side of things. The offshore stock index then had its worst trading day since the global financial crisis
with a decline of nearly 10 per cent.
With the market for Chinese-exposed stocks highly speculative, it’s best to play it safe and shovel all your money into crypto.
MORNING MARKETS
China’s runaway stocks rally stuttered as investors tempered their expectations for a robust economic recovery, keeping pressure
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today-1084/] on shares globally. Wall Street
futures were in negative territory as investors looked to the minutes from the Federal Reserve’s September meeting for insight into the interest-rate path. TSX futures followed
cautious sentiment lower.
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was up 0.22 per cent in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 gained 0.26 per cent, Germany’s DAX rose 0.25 per cent and France’s CAC 40
advanced 0.26 per cent.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

94/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Japan’s Nikkei closed 0.87 per cent higher, buoyed by a rise in Seven & i shares on reports that Canada’s Couche-Tard had sweetened its takeover bid
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-couche-tards-revised-bid-for-7-eleven-owner-sweetens-offer-by-a-fifth/] for the 7-Eleven parent company. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng fell
1.38 per cent.
The Canadian dollar traded at 73.12 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: Three signposts in the AI revolution [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-threesignposts-in-the-ai-revolution/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241009eka9001md

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

95/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
3292 words
2 February 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Calgary-based integrated oil firm Imperial Oil Ltd. ( IMO-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/IMO-T/] ) was higher despite reporting a fall in fourth-quarter
profit on Friday, hit by lower oil prices and maintenance activities that hampered throughput volumes.
Quarterly downstream throughput was 407,000 barrels per day (bpd) compared with 433,000 bpd in the year-ago quarter.
Capacity utilization stood at 94 per cent, well below 101 per cent recorded in 2022, the highest utilization in Imperial’s history.
Throughput is the amount of petroleum product that moves through a refinery in particular period.
The company cited planned maintenance at its Sarnia refinery for the impact on throughput volumes.
The company posted a net income of $1.37-billion, or $2.47 per share, for the quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with $1.73-billion, or $2.86 per share, a year earlier.
Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q/] ) surged on Friday after the e-commerce heavyweight reported higher-than-expected holiday
quarter sales and its lucrative cloud business signaled early gains from AI-powered features.
The company joined Microsoft and other tech firms in starting to see results benefiting from their heavy AI investments, while also outlining more spending in 2024 to develop the muchhyped tech.
“AWS (Amazon Web Services) is also seeing a strong ramp in early Gen AI revenue, though still a small contribution on a about $100 billion run-rate business. We believe AWS will
gain meaningful traction in Gen AI over the coming year,” J.P.Morgan’s Doug Anmuth said.
At least 13 brokerages raised their price targets on the stock as the online retail giant posted a 14-per-cent rise in sales in the holiday quarter, pointing to strong spending despite a
strained economy.
“We believe Amazon is executing extremely well and the challenges the company faced in Retail during the pandemic and in AWS through optimizations will make the company
stronger on the other side,” Anmuth said.
Shares of the company, which climbed 81 per cent in 2023, were trading at US$169.45 in early trading, also lifted by an upbeat revenue forecast.
Amazon projected current-quarter revenue to be as much as US$143.5-billion. Analysts had expected US$142.13-billion, according to LSEG data.
“The real reaction is to their guidance, where other tech firms have been softening revenue ranges and earnings per share targets, Amazon has come out with a much higher-thanexpected range,” said Jamie Meyers, senior analyst at Laffer Tengler Investments, which holds shares of Microsoft, Alphabet and Amazon.
As of last close, the stock was trading at 40.51 times its forward earnings per share, compared with 31.57 for cloud rival Microsoft ( MSFT-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q] ) and 23.75 for retail competitor Walmart ( WMT-N
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/WMT-N/] ) .
Amazon is set to add about US$115-billion to its market capitalization if premarket gains hold.
Despite hefty investments this year going into building cloud infrastructure to support the rapid adoption of generative AI technology , investors were bullish.
“I would expect that the recent state of generative AI investments should eventually lead to strong return on investment,” said Krishna Chintalapalli, portfolio manager at shareholder
Parnassus Investments.
Meta ( META-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/META-Q/] ) surged on Friday as the Facebook parent’s first dividend declaration and robust results
increased expectations of strong returns from its investments in “metaverse” technologies and artificial intelligence infrastructure.
Days ahead of Facebook’s 20th anniversary, Meta authorized an additional US$50-billion in share repurchases and said its quarterly dividend would be 50 US cents per share.
The social media giant is the first of its generation of internet juggernauts to issue a dividend, and the fourth from the so-called “Magnificent Seven” stocks, with its yield of 0.51 per cent
matching that of Apple ( AAPL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AAPL-Q] ), according to LSEG data.
“The returning of cash to shareholders is a bold and well-regarded move. The amount of free cash pumping through the business means it is more than able to afford it, and it helps
pay investors for their patience,” Sophie Lund-Yates, lead equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said.
The new dividend plan would also mean a hefty payout for CEO Mark Zuckerberg, who owns about 350 million Meta Class A and Class B shares. The Facebook co-founder could get
about US$175-million every quarter.
“Meta’s strategy of announcing buybacks and dividends right before the Fed begins to cut rates is a brilliant move. As the battle for innovation grows ... in the Big Tech space, investors
will see any extra capital as dry powder for future earnings growth,” said Thomas Monteiro, analyst at Investing.com.
The company flagged strong ad sales and a rebound in user growth during its fourth-quarter results on Thursday, while also forecasting current-quarter revenue above analysts’
estimates.
“Revenue growth and guidance likely put to rest the biggest hang-up of owning Meta ... but we were more impressed with the long-term vision laid out,” Bernstein analyst Mark Shmulik
said.
Meta has been working at keeping costs low during the last year, and let go of more than 21,000 employees since late 2022, with Zuckerberg calling 2023 the “Year of Efficiency”.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

96/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The world’s biggest social media company has been spending billions of dollars over the past decade to boost its computing capacity for generative AI products it is adding to
Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, and to hardware devices such as its Ray-Ban smart glasses.
Meta’s shares trade at 21.29 times expected earnings, compared with a forward PE of 83.85 for social media rival Snap , 20.38 for Alphabet, 40.51 for Amazon, 31.57 for Microsoft and
27.36 for Apple.
Meta was on track to gain roughly US$173-billion in market value, based on a premarket share price of US$462.08, if gains hold.
“The ‘Year of Efficiency’ has paid off, with both headcount and costs dropping, and Meta exceeding our expectations for full-year 2023 ad revenue,” Jasmine Enberg, principal analyst
at Insider Intelligence, said.
Indigo Books & Music Inc. ( IDG-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/IDG-T/] ) jumped in response to the news its is considering a proposal from its largest
shareholder to take the company private [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-indigo-shares-private-trilogy/] , following a tumultuous year that included a debilitating
cyberattack, the departures of board members and senior executives, and mounting financial losses.
The offer comes from Onex founder and chairman Gerry Schwartz, Indigo’s controlling shareholder and member of the company’s board. Mr. Schwartz’s personal holding companies,
Trilogy Retail Holdings Inc. and Trilogy Investments LP, announced on Thursday that they had made a non-binding privatization proposal to acquire all of Indigo’s common shares they
do not already own, for $2.25 in cash per share.
Indigo founder Heather Reisman returned just months ago as chief executive officer, promising “ a major transformation process [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/articleheather-reisman-indigo-ceo/] ” at Canada’s largest bookstore chain, which has lost money in four of its past five fiscal years.
Ms. Reisman, who is married to Mr. Schwartz, had retired from the top job in the fall of 2022, though she stayed on as executive chair of the board. Then last June, Indigo announced
that Ms. Reisman would retire from the board in August. In the same press release, Indigo announced the resignation of four board members – one of whom said she had experienced
“mistreatment” at the company and had lost confidence in the board’s leadership. Also in June, Reitmans Canada Ltd. announced that it had hired away Indigo president Andrea
Limbardi to be its new CEO.
In July, Indigo reported that its losses widened to $50-million in its most recent fiscal year, which ended April 1, 2023. In September, the CEO who Ms. Reisman had hired to replace
her, British retail executive Peter Ruis, also left.
- Susan Krashinsky Robertson
Exxon Mobil ( XOM-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/XOM-N] ) gained ground as it posted a better-than-expected US$36-billion profit for 2023, lifted by
fuels trading and higher oil and gas production.
Oil majors are expected to report 2023 profits down by about a third from record levels in 2022, as oil and gas prices retreated from the peaks that followed Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine.
Exxon results included a US$2.5-billion impairment charge for California properties that it has been trying to sell for more than a year. Excluding that charge, annual income fell 35 per
cent to US$38.57-billion.
Top oil producers are writing off unwanted assets and cleaning up their balance sheets ahead of pending deals. Chevron has said it would take an about US$4-billion impairment in the
fourth quarter, while Shell on Thursday took a US$5.5-billion writedown.
Exxon agreed in October to buy rival Pioneer Natural Resources to bolster its U.S. shale oil production in the Permian Basin, and Chevron proposed to purchase Hess Corp to get a
foothold in Guyana. Both deals are expected to close mid-year.
Chevron Corp. ( CVX-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CVX-N] ) also increased on Friday beat analysts’ earnings estimates and increased dividends on
higher oil and gas production, after a year of sharply lower profits on missteps and charges.
Shares in the pre-trading market rose a fraction after the company beat analysts’ consensus forecast by 24 US cents with adjusted earnings of US $3.45 per share in the fourth quarter.
The second largest U.S. oil producer reported a sharply lower, US$21.3-billion profit for 2023 as earnings from oil production and refining fuels tumbled.
The company has suffered from delayed expansion programs and higher costs in its oil and gas production business. In refining, U.S. margins fell sharply even as rivals reported
better-than-expected results.
Despite the nearly 40-per-cent fall in annual profit, Chevron said it would increase its dividend by 8 per cent in a sign of confidence. It returned a record US$26.3-billion last year to
shareholders via dividends and buybacks.
“We returned more cash to shareholders and produced more oil and natural gas than any year in the company’s history,” CEO Mike Wirth said.
Oil and gas production rose on shale gains and acquisitions. In the Permian basin, the top U.S. shale field, volumes rose 10 per cent, helping lift output for the year to 3.12 million
barrels of oil and gas per day.
But lower prices, foreign currency hits and one-time charges offset the volume gains. Fourth-quarter earnings fell 18 per cent from a year earlier to US$6.45-billion, excluding US$3.7billion in charges to impair existing assets in California and to cover decommissioning costs in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.
Adjusted full-year earnings were US$24.69-billion, or US$13.13 per share, down from US$36.54-billion, or US$18.83 per share, in the prior year.
Clorox ( CLX-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CLX-N] ) raised its annual targets on Thursday, after handily beating quarterly earnings expectations , as
the bleach maker replenished inventory at a faster pace after a production blip in 2023, putting it back on track to meet robust demand.
The company’s shares jumped after it said it was rebuilding retailer inventories ahead of schedule and recouping market share losses, bouncing back from a cyberattack in August that
hampered its ability to fulfill orders.
“We made a lot more progress, more quickly than we anticipated... we lost less sales (in the quarter) because we had product back in retailer stores more quickly,” CFO Kevin
Jacobsen said in an interview.
At the height of the cyberattack, Clorox lost over five market share points, but had recovered to a decline of just one point at December-end and was improving in January, he added.
Clorox’s health and wellness segment, home to brands including Pine-Sol cleaning products, saw a 25-per-cent surge in sales, mainly driven by higher volumes.
That, coupled with higher prices, drove a 16-per-cent jump in the company’s second-quarter sales at US$1.99-billion, beating LSEG estimates of US$1.80-billion.
Clorox’s results were in contrast with other consumer goods companies that reported last week — toothpaste maker Colgate-Palmolive ( CL-N
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CL-N] ) forecast downbeat annual sales, while Kimberly-Clark ( KMB-N
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/KMB-N] ) missed fourth-quarter estimates.
Excluding items, Clorox posted per-share profit of US$2.16 for the quarter, above Wall Street estimates of US$1.10.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

97/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Mattel ( MAT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MAT-Q/] ) gained as activist investor Barington Capital pushes the toymaker to effect big changes that
include pursuing strategic alternatives for its Fisher-Price and American Girl brands and separating the role of CEO from the chairman.
Barington Capital has also asked for a pause on what it views as excessive stock-based compensation and has called for a US$2-billion share repurchase, it said in a letter to the CEO
Ynon Kreiz on Thursday, without disclosing its stake in Mattel.
“The long decline at both Fisher-Price and American suggests that Mattel may not be the right owner of these brands,” Barington Chairman James Mitarotonda said in the letter.
On the sale of American Girl and Fisher-Price, Barington’s said: “We believe that these brands are now detracting from the success at Mattel’s other segments, and hurting shareholder
value.”
“We look forward to engaging with Barington as we do with all our shareholders,” Mattel said in an email statement to Reuters, adding that it is in the process of reviewing their letter.
On the decline
Shares of Open Text Corp. ( OTEX-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/OTEX-T/] ) were lower despite the release of second-quarter 2024 financial estimates
after the bell on Thursday that topped analysts’ forecast.
After the bell on Thursday, the Waterloo, Ont.-based enterprise information management software reported revenue of US$1.535-billion, up 71 per cent year-over-year and above the
Street’s expectation of US$1.503-billion driven by a 58-per-cent rise in annual recurring revenues and gains in its License business. Earnings per share of US$1.24 was 4 US cents
above the consensus forecast.
“Cloud bookings materially surprised to the upside (63 per cent year-over-year) and OpenText essentially doubled its FY24 cloud bookings growth guidance (25-30 per cent from more
than 15 per cent previously). The inflection in cloud bookings growth reflects new AI offerings and improves visibility to OpenText seeing stronger organic growth. Maintain Outperform,
as we believe OpenText’s valuation is likely to continue to re-rate higher,” said RBC’s Paul Treiber in a research note.
Apple ( AAPL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AAPL-Q/] ) on Thursday forecast a drop in iPhone sales and targeted overall revenue US$6-billion below
Wall Street expectations as its China business took a hit.
This overshadowed overall fiscal first-quarter sales and profit that beat analysts’ targets, powered by iPhone growth, sending Apple shares down.
The results confirmed some analysts’ concerns that the company’s signature product is losing ground in the key Asian market where consumers are buying foldable phones and
phones from Huawei, powered by a China-made chip.
“China is the most competitive smartphone market in the world, and that hasn’t changed ,” Apple CEO Tim Cook told Reuters in an interview. He said iPhone sales there were down
“mid-single digits” in the December quarter, when accounting for currency exchange rates.
“In China, Apple is facing more competitive challenges not only because of Huawei but also because of foldables, which is a very popular and fast-growing segment in China - and as
we all know, Apple does not have a foldable device - yet,” said IDC analyst Nabila Popal.
Apple said sales in China in the December quarter were US$20.82-billion, missing analyst estimates of US$23.53-billion, according to LSEG data.
Revenue in the current quarter will be at least US$5-billion less than a year ago, when the company sold iPhones rapidly to replenish inventories drawn down by COVID-related factory
shutdowns, Apple Chief Financial Officer Luca Maestri told analysts on a conference call.
Mr. Maestri’s comments implied a revenue forecast of about US$90-billion and iPhone sales of around US$46-billion for the fiscal second quarter that ends in March. Wall Street
expected nearly US$96-billion in revenue and iPhone sales of $50 billion. They were US$51-billion in the 2023 quarter.
That would make it the company’s worst fiscal second quarter of iPhone sales since widespread COVID lockdowns in March 2020.
“The drag would be China - and it has everything to do with their seasonality, and the elongated replacement cycle,” said Ben Bajarin, CEO of research firm Creative Strategies.
“Regardless of what happens, (a drop in) year-over-year iPhone sales would be more of a concern than a quarter.”
For its fiscal first quarter ended Dec. 30, Apple reported sales of US$119.58-billion and profit of US$2.18 per share, both above analyst expectations of US$117.91-billion and
US$2.10 per share.
Sales of iPhones hit US$69.70-billion in the quarter, growing 6 per cent to beat analyst expectations of US$67.82-billion, on the strength of its iPhone 15 lineup, which includes
devices capable of capturing three-dimensional video for the Vision Pro headset being released this week. Apple’s total installed base of devices hit 2.2 billion, up from 2 billion a year
ago.
“We had particularly strong double-digit growth on iPhone in emerging markets outside of China,” Mr. Cook said.
Where Apple’s results disappointed, two other tech heavyweights, Amazon.com and Facebook owner Meta Platforms, reported quarterly results on Thursday which led to jumps in their
share prices.
Microsoft ( MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q] ) in January eclipsed Apple as the world’s most valuable company, with investors viewing
Apple as lagging in the AI race among tech heavyweights.
Apple has rarely discussed generative AI but on Thursday Mr. Cook said on the conference call that it was a “huge opportunity” and there was “a lot of work going on internally” but
that he did not plan to discuss it publicly until later this year.
Tesla Inc. ( TSLA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TSLA-Q/] ) was down in response to the recall of nearly all of the vehicles it has sold in the U.S.
because some warning lights on the instrument panel are too small.
Documents posted Friday by U.S. safety regulators say the recall will be done with an online software update. It covers the 2012 through 2023 Model S, the 2016 through 2023 Model
X, the 2017 through 2023 Model 3, the 2019 through 2024 Model Y and the 2024 Cybertruck.
The agency says that the brake, park and antilock brake warning lights have a smaller font size than required by federal safety standards. That can make critical safety information hard
to read, increasing the risk of a crash.
Tesla has already started releasing the software update, and owners will be notified by letter starting March 30.
NHTSA says it found the problem in a routine safety compliance audit on Jan. 8.
Tesla has identified three warranty claims potentially related to the problem, but has no reports of crashes or injuries.
The recall comes as the agency steps up scrutiny of Tesla vehicles. On Friday it also posted documents saying it had upgraded a 2023 investigation of steering problems to an
engineering analysis, a step closer to a recall.
With files from staff and wires

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

98/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-friday-feb-2-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240202ek220028l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

99/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

contributors

What communicators can learn from the media headlines of 2024
Anne Marie
742 words
31 December 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The most pivotal news stories of 2024 - whether freakish weather, advancements of artificial intelligence taking over humankind, or geopolitical shifts - have underscored the
important role of the media in shaping public opinion, sharing information, and holding those in power accountable.
The media, even as the industry transforms and some predict its demise (what on earth will pundits talk about without it?), acts as a watchdog, ensuring transparency and
accountability.
As a communicator, I depend on traditional media being there as one of the tools to get messages to audiences. Looking back over the year, there were important lessons in the
broadcast and print headlines that dominated the news cycle. As I strap on my seatbelt for another bumpy ride, I look back at the headlines of 2024:
1. Never-ending election season: Although the political landscape at the federal and international level has the least impact on our daily lives, those reality show dramas consumed
most of the social and media oxygen. We didn't experience a federal or Ontario election in 2024, but we talked about it endlessly.
Communicators need to pay close attention to the news cycle beyond the local or industry level to ensure what we have to say is heard. Focus on cutting through the public's cynicism
and the disinformation and our addiction to scandal news .
2. Passing the buck: Canada's economy showed signs of recovery post-pandemic, including a decrease in unemployment rates, an increase in GDP and growth in the number of
millionaires. But that's not what we talked about.
Storytellers must ensure the message is empathic, acknowledges the daily hardships many are experiencing and is easily understood. A solid jargon filter will be mandatory.
3. The storm brewing: 2024 was marked by extreme weather, including record-breaking heatwaves, devastating wildfires, costly hail storms and flooding. Although weather stories
dominate the headlines, media are sensitive to the fact that people grow weary of them, so they move on, leaving critical, on-the-ground communications to others.
Thanks to climate change , extreme weather events are expected to dominate headlines again in 2025. If communicators haven't been well-trained in crisis communications
specifically related to chaotic weather events, they'd do well to secure a well-seasoned trainer.
4. Health care on life support: According to the Ontario College of Family Physicians, there are 2.5 million people in Ontario without a family doctor. Folks are relying on walk-in clinics
or emergency departments, which in turn increases wait times. And the tragic mental health and toxic drug supply crises were impossible to ignore at a community level.
Data played an important role in putting a face on health care stories and that will continue into the new year. Back your facts up.
5. House poor: The housing market was in critical condition in 2024, with home ownership unaffordable and rents unattainable for many. Late to act, but governments - federal,
provincial and municipal - have introduced measures and increased funding. Projects, however, are only beginning and interest rates are just starting to come down so life supports
must remain.
Along with data-driven stories, communicators must improve their capacity for people-driven storytelling to help audiences understand the personal benefits.
6. Did an AI-powered, digital twin write this?: No, but the rapid development of generative AI technology is revolutionizing content creation, prompting discussions on the ethical
implications and future potential of AI in media and communications. While we are in cyberspace, the increasing frequency of cybersecurity incidents - remember the CrowdStrike and
Microsoft meltdown in July - highlight the vulnerabilities and the importance of robust cybersecurity measures.
The AI future is here and it's not as sci-fi or terrifying as the version in our nightmares. What should scare us, however, is the volume and potential impact of cybersecurity incidents.
Both need attention and investment in policy development and training before the digital gremlins strike.
This list isn't inclusive of all the top news headlines of 2024 - the immigration crisis, military conflicts and increasing racial tensions at home and the impact of the U.S. election and
threats of tariffs, to name a few.
The media landscape and public discourse will be shaped by the storytellers - wherever you may find them - who manage to quickly convey complex information with clarity and
accuracy, and meaningfully engage and inform diverse audiences.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020241231ekcv000b6

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

100/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: A friendship faces a falling out; What’s at stake for Canada in tomorrow’s U.S. election
Chris Wilson-Smith
1333 words
4 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Canada has a lot at stake in tomorrow’s U.S. presidential election – particularly in the event of a Donald Trump victory, which could inject a wee bit of volatility into global trade.
(So much is at stake, in fact, that you’d think I would not have written in Friday’s edition that the election is on Wednesday. That’s wrong: It’s tomorrow! Ignore Friday Chris. He’s old
news .)
Apologies for his mistake. Okay, down to business:
In the news
Carbon capture: Oil sands CEOs are optimistic [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-oil-sands-ceos-optimistic-for-movement-on-16-billion-carbon-capture/] for movement
on a $16-billion emissions project.
Cash cache: Warren Buffett is sitting on more than US$325-billion in cash [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-warren-buffett-is-sitting-on-over-us325-billion-cash-asberkshire/] after continuing to unload billions of dollars worth of Apple and Bank of America shares.
Hikes on hold: Bell Canada parent BCE is expanding into the United States by acquiring internet provider Ziply Fiber for $5-billion, while also pausing dividend increases
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-bce-paying-5-billion-for-us-internet-provider-ziply-pauses-dividend/] in order to help fix its balance sheet.
Happening this week:
* Did we mention the U.S. election is tomorrow? You can follow our live coverage here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-us-presidential-election-harris-trump-latestupdates-november-3/] .
* The day after the vote, the U.S. Federal Reserve Board begins meeting ahead of Thursday’s interest-rate decision [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/internationalbusiness/article-federal-reserve-set-to-cut-rates-again-while-facing-a-hazy-post/] , which is widely expected to be a quarter-point cut.
* China announces October trade figures on Thursday. Exports to the U.S. at risk just as you need them the most? Figures.
* GFL Environmental Inc., whose Toronto office building was hit with a barrage of bullets last week [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-gfl-office-hit-with-10-bullets-inovernight-shooting-extending-string/] in the newest attack on homes, property and equipment linked to the waste-management company, reports after close on Wednesday.
* You can find more earnings and events from the week ahead here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-calendar-what-investors-need-toknow-for-the-week-ahead-61/] .
In focus
The U.S. election’s many effects on Canada
The results of tomorrow’s vote carry massive implications for the Canadian economy – which depends, in large part, on a healthy trade relationship with its wealthy southern neighbour.
Globe reporters Jason Kirby, Mark Rendell and Matt Lundy laid out the implications [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-why-canadas-economy-is-facing-a-turbulentfour-years-regardless-of-a/] of a Harris or Trump victory on trade, markets, energy and taxation. Here, we take a quick spin through their findings:
On trade
Trump: The former president has promised a 10-per-cent to 20-per-cent tariff on all imports into the United States, and much steeper levies on Chinese goods, Mexican cars and other
products he claims are undercutting American manufacturing.
That poses a major risk to the Canadian economy: More than 70 per cent of Canada’s exports go to the U.S. – worth around $650-billion in 2023. A large amount of business
investment is premised on seamless access to the much larger market to the south, the reporters write.
Economist Trevor Tombe calculates that a 10-per-cent U.S. universal tariff, combined with retaliation from other countries, could shave $45-billion off the Canadian economy and lead to
a 1.6-per-cent drop in productivity.
Harris: If her trade policy represents a more nuanced approach than “tariffs on everything,” we haven’t seen much evidence of it from her campaign. We noted in Friday’s newsletter
that economists see her policies on that front as “a bit of a blank slate,” but what we do know suggests a more protectionist stand than that of President Joe Biden.
As a senator, she was one of 10 who voted against the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), which replaced the North American free-trade agreement, which she’s also
on record saying she would have voted against. As the USMCA comes up for renegotiation in 2026, Canada might be in tough.
Ottawa and its economic allies might already have their hands full anyway. European Union officials are unprepared for a potential Trump-inspired tariff onslaught, which could trigger a
global trade war, Eric Reguly writes [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/us-politics/article-trump-harris-economy-campaign-promises-impact/] . Even a Harris victory could trigger
tariff misery, he says.
(I’ve been reading stories about how those top European officials have been racing to prepare for the possibility that Trump might win, which either suggests a forgetfulness that the
U.S. presidential election is held on the same day every four years – or that top European officials are, like many of us, just getting by as best we can.)
On energy
Trump would roll back the Biden administration’s climate-friendly policies, which would have a significant impact on some states in particular.
* As The Globe’s Adam Radwanski recently reported [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-us-energy-inflation-reduction/] , Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act is powering a
clean energy boom and bringing jobs to swing states like Georgia.
* And even Texas, the reddest and oiliest of states, is embracing renewable energy, Jeffrey Jones reports [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-texas-alberta-renewableenergy/] .

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

101/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Economists don’t believe he’d hit Canadian oil with tariffs, but one of the only predictable things about Trump is that he can be, at times, unpredictable. In any event, tariffs on that scale
would be bad for exporters of energy or anything:
Harris, meanwhile, has undergone a remarkable transformation on fossil fuels. At a 2019 campaign even, she compared the industry [https://www.cnn.com/2024/10/15/politics/harrisoil-companies-emissions-kfile/index.html] to Big Tobacco:
“They had done the studies and they knew of the harm that their product was creating, but they still pushed their product ‘cause they were making a ton of money. That’s the same thing
with Big Oil. They’ve known for a long time what they’ve been doing that is destroying this God-given planet,” she said.
At a September rally this year, Harris boasted that she and Biden had overseen “the largest increase in domestic oil production in history because of an approach that recognizes that
we cannot over rely on foreign oil.″
That’s a fast change of heart on fuel. But when you’re suddenly running for president of the United States, you need all the energy you can get.
You can read more on the election’s effects on Canada from our reporting team here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-why-canadas-economy-is-facing-a-turbulentfour-years-regardless-of-a/] .
Recommended election reading:
We might be caught up in a fraught period, but complacency is having a moment.
* Ian McGugan wonders [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-theres-plenty-for-investors-to-dislike-about-donald-trump-so-why-are/] why
markets have seemed so complacent about the election.
* Which reminds me of Tim Shufelt’s piece [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-theres-war-raging-in-two-oil-producing-regions-why-arent-wefacing-a/] wondering why oil traders seem so complacent about global economic shocks.
* And the Bank of England lectured last week that “we mustn’t get complacent” over artificial intelligence [https://www.computerweekly.com/news/366614867/Bank-of-Englandwarns-against-AI-complacency] and its impact on financial stability.
Globe Junius declares that Canada [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/editorials/article-the-defence-of-canada-is-no-numbers-game/] is either headed for the worst four-year
stretch of economic performance in its history, or the federal Liberals have bungled the math on their plan to ramp up defence spending through the end of the decade. ( Junius
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/editorials/article-who-is-junius-the-subject-who-is-truly-loyal-to-the-chief-magistrate/] is shorthand around here for our editorial board.)
The lookout
On our radar and reading list
London’s landlord: How one developer landed at the centre of a fight over the Southwestern Ontario city’s core [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-farhi-holdingslondon-ontario-real-estate-vacancies/] .
Dreaming of electric sheep: Gadgets and tech promising a good night’s sleep [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/health-and-fitness/article-gadgets-and-tech-promising-a-goodnights-sleep-are-rampant-and/] are rampant and expensive, but do they work?
Hmmm: Generative large language models like OpenAI’s ChatGPT are using techniques similar to human thought [https://www.wired.com/story/plaintext-ai-will-understand-humansbetter-than-humans-do/] as an “unintended by-product.” Huh! Huh.
Morning markets
Global markets edged higher [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today-1101/]
in cautious trading ahead of tomorrow’s U.S. presidential election, which is still too close to call. Wall Street futures were in positive territory while TSX futures were up as crude
prices climbed.
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was up 0.24 per cent in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 rose 0.625 per cent, Germany’s DAX inched 0.04 per cent lower and France’s
CAC 40 advanced 0.24 per cent.
In Asia, markets in Japan were closed for a holiday, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng closed up 0.3 per cent.
The Canadian dollar traded at 71.89 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: A friendship faces a falling out [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-a-friendshipfaces-a-falling-out/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241104ekb4001md

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

102/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

Microsoft to add AI chatbot button to keyboards
By MATT O’BRIEN
404 words
5 January 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B5
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Computer keyboards are making room for an artificial-intelligence chatbot button as Microsoft Corp. unveils its first major keyboard redesign in three decades.
Starting this month, some new personal computers that run Microsoft's Windows operating system will have a special “Copilot key" that launches the software giant's AI chatbot.
Getting third-party computer manufacturers to add an AI button to laptops is the latest move by Microsoft to capitalize on its close partnership with ChatGPT maker OpenAI and make
itself a gateway for applications of generative AI technology .
Although most people now connect to the internet – and many AI applications – by phone rather than computer, it's a symbolic kickoff to what's expected to be a competitive year as
tech companies race to outdo each other in AI applications even as they haven't yet resolved all the ethical and legal ramifications.
The New York Times last month sued both OpenAI and Microsoft alleging that tools such as ChatGPT and Copilot – formerly known as Bing Chat – are infringing on copyrighted
news articles.
The keyboard redesign will be Microsoft's biggest change to PC keyboards since it introduced a special Windows key in the 1990s.
Microsoft's four-squared logo design has evolved, but the key has been a fixture on Windows-oriented keyboards for about three decades.
The newest AI button will be marked by the ribbon-like Copilot logo and be located near the space bar. On some computers it will replace the right “CTRL" key, while on others it will
replace a menu key.
Microsoft is not the only company with customized keys. Apple Inc. pioneered the concept in the 1980s with its “Command" key marked by a looped square design (it also sported an
Apple logo for a time). Google has a search button on its Chromebooks and was first to experiment with an AI-specific key to launch its voice assistant on its now-discontinued
Pixelbook.
But Microsoft has a much stronger hold on the broader PC market through its licensing agreements with third-party manufacturers such as Lenovo, Dell and HP.
About 82 per cent of all desktop computers, laptops and workstations run Windows, compared with 9 per cent for Apple's inhouse operating system and just over 6 per cent for
Google's, according to market-research firm IDC.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240105ek150001d

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

103/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Canada

Lessons from a local news publisher
LISA SYGUTEK
929 words
21 November 2024
Montreal Gazette
MTLG
Early
NP2
English
Copyright © 2024 Montreal Gazette

Recently, I attended an invigorating summit in Prince Edward Island, convened by the Rideau Hall Foundation about local media. There were publishers large and small from across
Canada and experts from abroad, such as Ricky Sutton from Australia and Stephen Waldman from the United States.
Like many local newspapers , the Crowsnest Pass Herald has been around for a long time. It was founded in 1930. My mom worked there and eventually became a coowner in 1969.
I've worked there since university and am now the sole owner. As a small entrepreneur, in any given week, I write copy, sell ads and even deliver newspapers .
Over the years, I've learned a few things along the way.
First, Big Tech is destroying local media. In 2014, we started doing ads with Google, which I thought was going to be a game- changer . The good news was that Google ads started
popping up all over the place; the bad news was that I received a mere 17 cents from Google. Half our revenue used to come from big national brands such as Ford, General Motors
and Dodge. They were doing full-page ads, and things were great. We had a thriving business, but as Google and Meta got into the advertising game, I watched our national
advertising shrink dramatically. To put that in perspective, since 1999, my gross revenue has dropped by two-thirds, which is tough when you're just trying to meet payroll. That's why I
am the lead on an $8-billion class-action lawsuit.
Second, publishers are stronger when we stick together. While I was furious when most of the large news publishers cut their own one-off content licensing deals with Google and
Meta, I was encouraged that they pushed for what became the Online News Act to ensure Big Tech pays not only the big guys, but also community publishers such as myself.
Third, in the absence of the U.S. Department of Justice breaking up Google's monopoly in ad tech, publishers around the world are going to continue to need some level of government
support. On this point, I'm encouraged by the words of now U.S. vice-president-elect JD Vance, who posted the following on X: "Long overdue, but it's time to break Google up."
Fourth, when it comes to government support, we need to make sure that government supports don't advantage one type of publisher over another. For example, there are some who
say the only solution is tax credits for readers. Such a credit already exists - albeit not a very generous one. One digitally savvy publisher told the Neiman Lab at Harvard that the result
was "negligible." Like all tax credits, a subscription tax credit, irrespective of its design, is limited in its ability to create demand given that many Canadians are not prepared to pay a
subscription fee for news content even if a future partial reimbursement (lumped into their tax return) is foreseeable. According to the Reuters Institute, only 15 per cent of Canadians
are paying for news .
Anecdotally, it is no wonder that one can regularly find the big guys in the market with incredibly discounted subscription plans. Their marketing executives are reading the same data
and concluding that most new subscribers are only willing to pay a few bucks a month.
There is no question that a richer digital subscription tax credit would be a nice boutique tax break for the Starbucks-sipping Laurentian elites who are already subscribing to several
newspapers . However, it would do nothing for the hundreds of weekly community newspapers across Canada. Local news , in my opinion, is not some luxury good for the privileged
few. Heck, we don't even have a Starbucks in Crowsnest Pass, Alta.
Fifth, the best supports are those that incent the right behaviours and outcomes. The Canadian journalism labour tax credit is elegant in its simplicity, and it is highly targeted to
reward newsroom investment.
Sixth, governments and businesses need to step up with advertising. Ontario Premier Doug Ford has committed 25 per cent of the province's advertising budget to support news , and
we need others to do the same. To governments and corporate advertisers, if you want to reach the 5,600 good people of Crowsnest Pass and keep your money in Canada rather than
seeing it flow to California, give me a holler.
Finally, the CBC is too big and bloated, and the next government needs to address that. The idea that some are advocating that its content should be shared under a Creative
Commons licence where newspapers such as mine would fill up our pages with CBC content is bonkers. Local news is about a balance of local perspectives - not the kind of woke,
lefty content we see coming from the CBC mother ship in Toronto.
While it would be far too easy for me to be discouraged and just close the newspaper like so many other owners across Canada have done, I see my ownership as a legacy from my
mom and a sacred commitment that she imparted in me to keep my community of 5,600 people informed. With the rise of fake news , which is only going to accelerate with advances
in artificial intelligence , real news is more important than ever before, and all Canadians have an interest in ensuring its long-term viability in communities across the country.
Postmedia Network Lisa Sygutek is owner and publisher of the Crowsnest Pass Herald.
Postmedia Network Inc.
Document MTLG000020241121ekbl00014

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

104/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Will AI make you obsolete? The future of work in the age of automation; Workers must now all make one critical mindset
shift, followed by one simple action
Henryk Krajewski
947 words
10 July 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Henryk Krajewski, Ph.D. is an executive director at leadership advisory firm Russell Reynolds Associates. He specializes in working with CEOs and teams on creating highperformance organizations.
According to the 2024 Edelman Trust Barometer [https://www.edelman.ca/sites/g/files/aatuss376/files/202403/2024%20Edelman%20Trust%20Barometer_Canada%20Report_EN_0.pdf] , less than one in three Canadians trust artificial intelligence and more than half are hesitant or
resistant to innovations in artificial intelligence (AI) – nearly as many who feel the same away about genetically modified foods.
Fair enough. Our popular news and social media sources inundate us with news of how AI is going to take over our jobs and our worlds. Mark Cuban, billionaire investor and former
majority owner of the NBA’s Dallas Mavericks, said [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CxD4F3MQRDI&ab_channel=BloombergOriginals] AI is “bad news for employment … there is
going to be more people out of work.” Likewise, Elon Musk recently stated [https://ca.finance.yahoo.com/news/elon-musk-predicts-jobs-become-103823555.html] that “long term … any
job that somebody does will be optional.”
So, is this the promise of AI [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/artificial-intelligence/] - that it will slowly but surely put us all out of work? If so, where will it start and with which
jobs? What will the state of the workplace look like? And what should employees be doing to prepare?
In terms of where AI is having the greatest current impact, Jason Lee, who leads the applied data team at advisory firm MNP, told me “sectors like manufacturing, energy, utilities and
the public sector are experiencing substantial AI impact, with [ generative] AI set to disrupt financial services, insurance and energy industries. Roles such as office support, sales,
legal, business operations and healthcare support will be most affected.”
But what about AI itself? Surely there must be job growth in careers related to creating, working and managing AI technologies.
Indeed, Fawad Bajwa, global AI practice leader at leadership advisory firm Russell Reynolds Associates, sees an upswing in the global demand for AI-related roles. “The demand for
talent in this space is substantially higher than what it was 18 months ago when AI was not on top of everyone’s mind,” he told me.
Many organizations are indeed building and attracting talent in AI-related fields, across industries and across the globe. Mr. Bajwa said “no industry will be untouched by AI and the
need for AI talent. Like the Industrial Revolution disrupted blue-collar jobs, the AI revolution will disrupt white-collar jobs.”
Are Mr. Cuban and Mr. Musk right? Are we all going to lose our jobs to AI? Should we fear or embrace the shift, and why? I asked these questions of Google’s cloud and AI leader for
Canada, Sam Sebastian.
“While the adoption of new technology often comes with uncertainty, I believe AI will in fact enable us to be more human. If we embrace AI correctly, we will open up opportunities for all
workers to focus on strategy and human connection, driving more impact,” he said. “For example, Doctors are using AI to take and file notes, so they can spend more time with
patients, and marketers leverage AI to build visuals, so they can focus on brand strategy and audience engagement.”
Mr. Lee concurs, saying “human input remains crucial alongside automation, preserving the unique insights and experiences of workers.”
Mr. Bajwa summed it up well: “AI will not replace humans. But … humans with AI will replace humans without AI.”
Workers must now all make one critical mindset shift, followed by one simple action. In terms of mindset, we need to recognize that humans are psychologically wired with a negativity
bias [https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/articles/200306/our-brains-negative-bias] , which associates change with a certain degree of fear and loss. Thus, humans much prefer
avoiding pain in the short term (changing routines, learning new technologies) rather than approaching gains for the long term (being first in line for new opportunities, embracing new
technology). It’s hard for most people to see that the greater risk is in not going along with the AI revolution .
What is the simple action? Experiment. Many have access to Microsoft’s Copilot companion through their work and don’t even know what it can do. Google’s Gemini can be a life
companion for just about any need. Many organizations have internal GenAI systems running and available to experiment with. Research shows the No. 1 predictor
[https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/worklab/work-trend-index/ai-at-work-is-here-now-comes-the-hard-part] of whether someone integrates AI into their work and life is whether they will
experiment with different ways of using AI. More than 90 per cent of such experimenters report multiple benefits, including managing workloads, enhancing focus and boosting
creativity.
What does AI itself have to say about AI and jobs? I asked Google Gemini and its first answer was quite equivocal. When pressed, Gemini first apologized, then admitted “there will
indeed be substantial job impact, because AI can learn and perform tasks much faster than humans, making it efficient for repetitive jobs. While new AI-focused fields will emerge, they
may not require the same number of workers being displaced.”
Indeed, the AI revolution is a critical waypoint for evolving organizations – and leadership will play a pivotal role in shaping its success. How leaders approach its adoption, however,
can have unintended consequences. More on this next week.
This column is part of Globe Careers’ Leadership Lab series, where executives and experts share their views and advice about the world of work. Find all Leadership Lab stories at
tgam.ca/leadershiplab and guidelines for how to contribute to the column here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/careers/leadership/submissions/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Will AI make you obsolete? The future of work in the age of automation
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/careers/leadership/article-will-ai-make-you-obsolete-the-future-of-work-in-the-age-of-automation/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240710ek7a000p2

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

105/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both
directions
David Leeder
3876 words
1 May 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Barrick Gold Corp. ( ABX-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/KHC-Q/] ) rose on Wednesday after it beat first-quarter profit estimates on higher
bullion prices and said it has entered into an exploration partnership with Geophysx Jamaica.
Prices of the precious metal rose about 8.2 per cent to US$2,231 per ounce in the January-March quarter, on buying from central banks and hopes the U.S. Federal Reserve could cut
interest rates as early as June.
The world’s second-largest gold miner said its average realized gold prices rose to US$2,075 per ounce from US$1,902 per ounce a year earlier.
All-in sustaining costs per ounce of gold, an industry metric that reflects total expenses, was US$1,474 in the quarter, up from US$1,370 per ounce a year earlier.
Rival Newmont ( NGT-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NGT-T] ) also topped profit estimates last week, as the world’s largest gold miner benefited from
robust production, prices and lower operating costs.
The Toronto-based company, in a separate release, said as part of its agreement with Geophysx, Barrick will have the right to work with the private mineral exploration company to earn
up to an 80% joint-venture interest in designated properties located in Jamaica.
The partnership would initially provide Barrick with access to about 4,000 square kilometres of consolidated land positions throughout the country, with a favorable geological setting
comparable to the Dominican Republic, where it operates the Pueblo Viejo mine.
Barrick’s gold production fell to 940,000 ounces in the quarter, versus estimates of 947,330 ounces.
But it expects production to increase steadily through the year, with operations ramping up at its Goldrush mine in Nevada and at Pueblo Viejo, along with restarting of the Porgera
mine in Papua New Guinea.
The company’s quarterly revenue of US$2.75-billion was higher than the US$2.64-billion a year ago.
It posted adjusted profit of 19 US cents per share, compared with LSEG estimates of 15 US cents.
Cenovus Energy ( CVE-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CVE-T/] ) rose after it beat first-quarter profit estimates on Wednesday, buoyed by higher
production and throughput volumes at its refineries.
Quarterly refining throughput in the quarter of 655,200 barrels per day (bpd) was a record while high operational availability at its downstream assets helped benefit from improved
benchmark pricing in the U.S., the company said.
“During the first quarter of 2024, we saw strong operational performance from our oil sands and Canadian refining assets, and improved operational performance from our U.S. refining
assets,” Cenovus said.
Calgary-based Cenovus said total upstream production rose nearly 3 per cent to 800,900 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) in the January-March quarter from a year earlier.
Crude oil prices were range-bound during the quarter, but still remained at a level at which oil and gas companies can produce profitably.
Cenovus said WTI crude prices stood at US$76.96 per barrel in the first three months of 2024, compared with US$76.13 a year earlier.
The company reported a net income of 62 cents per share in the first quarter, beating analysts’ average estimate of 54 cents, according to LSEG data.
Higher operating margin and a gain on asset sales also helped boost earnings, the company said.
Bombardier ( BBD-B-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BBD-B-T/] ) rose after it said on Wednesday NetJets was the customer for the order of 12
Challenger 3500 business jets announced in December.
At list prices, the order was valued at US$326.4-million at the time of signing, but could amount to more than US$6-billion if NetJets exercises its option for all 232 jets.
Ahead of its investor day on Wednesday, Bombardier said it was on track to hit its 2025 goals, which include revenue rising to over US$9-billion.
The business jet-maker added it was a year ahead in meeting its objective of growing its services revenue to US$2-billion by 2025.
Engineering firm Stantec Inc. ( STN-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/STN-T/] ) gained after saying it has acquired Hydrock, an engineering design firm
based in England.
Financial terms of the deal that closed on Tuesday were not disclosed.
Stantec says the addition of Hydrock and its 950 employees will increase its workforce in the United Kingdom by over 30 per cent.
The Canadian company says Hydrock’s project experience is focused on building design and performance, energy and sustainability, climate adaptation, and geo-environmental
services.
The deal is Stantec’s third acquisition in recent months.
It recently added Markham, Ont.-based engineering firm Morrison Hershfield as well as German infrastructure firm Zetcon Engineering.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

106/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q/] ) reported quarterly results above Wall Street’s expectations after the bell on Tuesday, as
interest in artificial intelligence helped drive cloud-computing growth.
CEO Andy Jassy told analysts that for Amazon “there is a big opportunity in front of us” in servicing AI customers.
Shares of the Seattle-based e-commerce and tech company climbed in Wednesday trade after its current-quarter revenue forecast came in below expectations .
Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky told reporters on a call that capital spending would increase throughout the year, compared with US$14-billion in the first quarter. “That will be the
low point for the year as far as capex by quarter,” he said.
“The majority of that will be to support AWS infrastructure and in particular generative AI efforts,” he said later on a call with analysts. Amazon is investing upfront to build out its AI
offerings to meet customer demand, particularly as customers seek out longer-term contracts, he said.
Amazon is racing to keep abreast of rivals in offering generative AI software. Competitors include Alphabet ( GOOGL-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q/] ) as well as Microsoft-backed ( MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/msft-Q/] )
OpenAI.
First-quarter sales increased 13 per cent to US$143.3-billion, higher than the US$142.5-billion average, according to LSEG data. Net income more than tripled to US$10.4-billion in the
first quarter.
The company expects revenue of US$144.0-billion to US$149.0-billion for the current quarter ending June, compared with analyst consensus expectations of US$150.07-billion,
according to LSEG data.
“After a year and a half of cutting cloud costs, it appears that enterprise customers are ready to move more workflows to the cloud again, which is positive not just for Amazon, but also
for many software companies that sell to enterprise customers,” said D.A. Davidson analyst Gil Luria.
Amazon Web Services (AWS), the largest provider of cloud-computing services, posted a 17-per-cent rise in revenue to US$25.0-billion in the first quarter, compared with
expectations of $24.53 billion.
That compares with a rise in cloud-computing revenue of 31 per cent for Microsoft and 28 per cent for Alphabet for the January-to-March period.
Amazon bucked a Big Tech trend of announcing a dividend, after rivals Alphabet and Meta Platforms ( META-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/meta-Q/] )
rolled out the investor goodie. The latter two announcements were cheered by investors who pushed the stock prices higher.
Amazon and Tesla ( TSLA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TSLA-Q/] ) remain the only members of the so-called Magnificent Seven tech stocks that do
not offer dividends. Its shares have climbed about 15 per cent in 2024, outperforming the S&P 500′s gain of about 6 per cent.
Net income of US$10.4-billion, or 98 US cents per diluted share, compared with US$3.2-billion, or 31 US cents per diluted share in 2023′s first quarter. That beat analysts’ average EPS
estimate of 83 US cents.
Pfizer ( PFE-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PFE-N/] ) was up after lifted its annual profit forecast on Wednesday, and reported first-quarter results that
topped Wall Street estimates on cost cuts, a smaller-than-feared drop in sales of its COVID antiviral treatment and strong sales of its pneumonia vaccine.
Sales of cancer treatment Padcev, which Pfizer gained through its US$43-billion deal for Seagen, also came in ahead of analysts’ expectations .
The Seagen deal, as well as its US$4-billion cost-cutting plan, are a key part of Pfizer’s post-COVID growth strategy. Investors have also been tracking the performance of the
company’s new RSV vaccine, which has been trailing a rival shot from GSK since they both launched.
The company raised both ends of its 2024 profit forecast range by 10 US cents and now expects to earn US$2.15 to US$2.35 per share.
Seagen’s targeted cancer therapies Padcev and Adcetris brought in combined sales of $598 million in the quarter for Pfizer, however Adcetris sales fell short of analysts’
expectations .
“We believe stronger new launch performance and further progress on the pipeline will be necessary to change the current narrative on the stock,” said JP Morgan analyst Chris
Schott.
Pfizer said it still expects US$8-billion in combined sales of its COVID-19 products, the vaccine Comirnaty it shares with BionTech and oral antiviral Paxlovid.
Pfizer posted an adjusted profit of 82 US cents per share, while analysts on average were expecting it to earn 52 US cents, according to LSEG data.
On the decline
Loblaw Companies ( L-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/L-T/] ) was lower despite topping expectations for first-quarter revenue and profit on Wednesday,
aided by sustained consumer demand well as easing prices of grocery items.
The food and pharmacy retailer has seen gains from steady sales of essential items such as groceries and medicines, as well as higher demand for its private labels as consumers
trade down from well-known brands that are typically more expensive.
Cost cut measures and promotional strategies have also helped the company to mitigate inflationary pressures, Loblaw has said.
With food prices now coming off their peaks in Canada, analysts expect consumer spending power to grow and boost sales across products, including on discretionary items such as
apparels.
The Brampton, Ont.-based company reported a 4.4-per-cent rise in its retail segment sales in the first quarter, echoing strong growth in its food and drug businesses.
Loblaw’s revenue rose 4.5 per cent to $13.58-billion from a year earlier, compared with analysts’ average estimate of $13.46-billion, according to LSEG data.
On an adjusted basis, Loblaw’s earnings per share came in at $1.72, above analysts’ average estimate of $1.70.
In a research note, Desjardins Securities analyst Chris Li said: “There is no change to our view. As expected, 1Q results reflected L’s consistent execution and strong positioning within
the food and drug retailing market, supported by favourable industry tailwinds. High earnings visibility is further highlighted by management’s expectation that its full-year high-singledigit EPS growth outlook should be consistent through the quarters. This should drive L’s outperformance near-term.”
Shares of Toronto-Dominion Bank ( TD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TD-T/] ) declined after it revealed it is setting aside US$450-million
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-td-bank-takes-us450-million-provision-related-to-probe-with-regulator/] to cover penalties it’s facing as a result of a lengthy U.S.
regulatory and law enforcement investigation that derailed the bank’s takeover of Tennessee-based First Horizon Corp. last spring.
Last year, TD said that it anticipated fines or other penalties stemming from probes by the U.S. Department of Justice and other agencies related to its anti-money-laundering practices.
The provision announced late Tuesday – which the bank said relates to penalties by one undisclosed regulator – is the first indication Canada’s second-largest lender has provided on
the impact of the investigation as its stretches into its second year.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

107/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Investors and analysts have closely watched TD’s anti-money-laundering issues, drilling into questions on the matter on quarterly earnings calls and at annual shareholder meetings.
But the bank has consistently said it cannot disclose any information on its discussions with regulators.
The probe prompted TD to terminate its takeover of First Horizon, a deal that would have significantly accelerated TD’s strategy in the United States, its most strategically important
market. The acquisition would have allowed TD to scoop up hundreds of retail branches and tens of billions of dollars in its biggest growth market.
- Stefanie Marotta
Shares of cannabis companies dipped a day after surging on an Associated Report report that he U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration will move to reclassify marijuana as a less
dangerous drug, marking a historic shift to generations of American drug policy that could have wide ripple effects across the country.
On Tuesday, Canopy Growth Corp. ( WEED-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/WEED-T/] ) closed up 80 per cent, while Aurora Cannabis Inc. ( ACB-T
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ACB-T/] ) and Tilray Brands Inc. ( TLRY-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TLRY-T/] ) rose 46
per cent and 40 per cent, respectively.
The proposal, which still must be reviewed by the White House Office of Management and Budget, would recognize the medical uses of cannabis and acknowledge it has less potential
for abuse than some of the nation’s most dangerous drugs. However, it would not legalize marijuana outright for recreational use.
The agency’s move, confirmed to the AP on Tuesday by five people familiar with the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive regulatory review, clears
the last significant regulatory hurdle before the agency’s biggest policy change in more than 50 years can take effect.
In a research note released before the bell, Eight Capital analyst Ty Collin called it a “transformational shift” for the industry.
“The DEA’s proposed scheduling rule will likely be followed by a public comment period and a hearing, but we are not aware of any instances in recent history where an initial
rescheduling rule did not ultimately go into effect,” he said.
“We believe the final rule could be issued sometime between late-summer and Election Day. We view this as a watershed moment for the U.S. Cannabis industry, with far-reaching and
potentially transformational implications. Rescheduling represents the first major shift in federal Cannabis policy since the Nixon administration, formally recognizing for the first time
that Cannabis offers medical benefits, and providing a key signal about the direction of U.S. cannabis policy going forward.”
Brookfield Asset Management ( BAM-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BAM-T/] ) was flat on news it has joined technology giant Microsoft ( MSFT-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q] ) to develop new wind and solar farms in an attempt to bring over 10.5 gigawatts of new renewable energy
capacity.
The agreement provides a pathway for Brookfield to deliver the new renewable energy capacity between 2026 and 2030 in the U.S. and Europe, a Microsoft spokesperson told Reuters
in an emailed statement.
The Financial Times first reported on the partnership, and said the 10.5 gigawatts of new capacity would cost more than US$10-billion, citing recent industry trends.
Both Brookfield and Microsoft did not disclose any financial terms of the agreement.
The deal underscores the race to meet clean energy commitments while satisfying the voracious energy demand of cloud computing and artificial intelligence .
Interfor Corp. ( IFP-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/IFP-T/] ) was down after announcing it plans to reduce its lumber production by approximately 175
million board feet between May and September, representing just under 10 per cent of its normal operating stance.
Citing “persistently weak” market conditions, the Burnaby, B.C.-based says the temporary curtailments will “impact all of Interfor’s operating regions, including the U.S, South, through a
combination of reduced operating hours, prolonged holiday breaks, reconfigured shifting schedules and extended maintenance shut-downs.”
Fortis Inc. ( FTS-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/FTS-T/] ) decreased after saying it earned $459-million in its first quarter, up from $437-million in the
same quarter last year.
The gas and electric utility company says the profit amounted to 93 cents per share for the quarter ended March 31, up from 90 cents per share a year earlier.
Revenue in the quarter totalled $3.12-billion, down from $3.32-billion in its first quarter last year.
Capital expenditures amounted to $1.13-billion in the quarter, up from $995-million a year earlier.
On an adjusted basis, Fortis says it earned 93 cents per share in its latest quarter, up from an adjusted profit of 91 cents per share in the same quarter last year.
Fortis serves utility customers in five Canadian provinces, 10 U.S. states and three Caribbean countries.
Shares of Starbucks ( SBUX-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SBUX-Q/] ) fell on Wednesday, after the coffee chain cut its annual forecasts on persistent
weak demand in the United States from inflation-weary customers and a slower-than-expected recovery in China.
Several quarters of price hikes have forced customers to ditch cafes and restaurants and instead drink coffee at home, hurting business for chains such as Starbucks.
Severe cold weather in the U.S. also discouraged sales at the company’s stores, while its business in the Middle East took a hit due to the Israel-Hamas war.
“The inability to stop the traffic leakage from the early signs of pull-back in November to date and the worsening macro and competitive dynamics in China may suggest prolonged
challenges and no evidence of light at the end of the tunnel,” Danilo Gargiulo, senior analyst at Bernstein, wrote in a note.
The company expects its full-year comparable sales — both globally and in the U.S. — to be in the range of a low single-digit decline to flat, compared with its previous range of 4-percent to 6-per-cent growth.
It also cut its per-share profit growth forecast to between flat and low-single digits, versus its earlier range of 15-per-cent to 20-per-cent growth.
“Many customers are being more exacting about where and how they choose to spend their money, particularly with stimulus savings mostly spent,” CEO Laxman Narasimhan said on
a post-earnings call.
Starbucks’ global comparable sales fell 4 per cent for the second quarter, compared with a 1.44-per-cent rise estimated by analysts, according to LSEG data.
Shares of Advanced Micro Devices ( AMD-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMD-Q/] ) and Super Micro Computer ( SMCI-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SMCI-Q/] ) sank on Wednesday, sparking a selloff in chip stocks, after their earnings disappointed investors who have piled
into the sector on hopes rising AI investments would boost demand.
AMD’S forecast of US$4-billion in AI chip sales for 2024 fell short of Wall Street’s lofty expectations , having been used to Nvidia’s ( NVDA-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/nvda-Q/] ) massive forecasts over the past year.
Super Micro Computer, whose near-200-per-cent stock jump this year has outpaced even gains in Nvidia, as its third-quarter revenue missed estimates amid questions over the
profitability of a new line of servers.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

108/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Executives of both AMD and Super Micro Computer said supply constraints were hampering their efforts to capitalize on demand for equipment powering the boom in generative AI .
“Stepping back, AMD has several customers who are all trying to ramp MI300 (AI chip) very quickly. This is stressing the supply chain to a certain extent,” said analysts at TD Cowen.
“However, from a demand perspective, customer engagement is in fact increasing, not only for MI300X but its successor products.”
Other AI-linked chip firms also traded lower, with Marvell Technology ( MRVL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MRVL-Q/] ), Micron Technology ( MU-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/mu-Q/] ) and Nvidia down.
The stocks have widely outperformed the benchmark S&P 500 index this year and powered a 11-per-cent jump in the Philadelphia Semiconductor Index.
Kraft Heinz ( KHC-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/KHC-Q/] ) missed Wall Street expectations for first-quarter sales on Wednesday, as inflation-weary
consumers pushed back on higher prices of its branded lunch combos, meat cold cuts and mac & cheese.
Shares were down even as the packaged food maker kept unchanged its fiscal year 2024 targets.
In a shift from 2023 when government benefits helped Americans expand their grocery budgets, shoppers this year are hunting for value, prompting Kraft-Heinz and peers to re-jig their
products and strategies following years of price hikes.
Overall volumes for the quarter fell 3.2 percentage points, while prices rose 2.7 percentage points across Kraft-Heinz’s portfolio.
Volumes decline in its biggest North America segment eased, down 3.7 percentage points from last year’s drop of 6.5 percentage points.
Kraft Heinz is leaning on promotions to help aid a recovery in volumes across its markets but still-high inflation has hampered those efforts.
The company still expects volumes to turn positive in the back half of the year.
The Heinz ketchup maker posted net sales of US$6.41-billion in the three months ended March 30, compared with analysts’ average estimate of US$6.43-billion, according to LSEG
data.
Adjusted earnings per share of 69 US cents was in line with analysts’ estimates.
The company maintained its forecasts for organic net sales growth to be flat to 2 per cent and adjusted earnings to grow in the range of 1 per cent to 3 per cent.
Estee Lauder ( EL-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/EL-N] ) lowered its annual organic sales estimate on persistent softness in Mainland China’s prestige
beauty space, even as a demand rebound in the U.S. and Asia-Pacific markets drove a profit forecast raise.
Shares of the New York-based company dropped on Wednesday.
Estee also beat Wall Street targets for third-quarter results, hinting at a recovery in demand for beauty and cosmetic products in the U.S. after a long bout of inflation had pressured
sales of luxury items in the world’s biggest economy.
A pick-up in China demand after several quarters of weakness also underscored customer willingness to splurge on “affordable luxuries” such as fragrances and make-up products.
“Estee Lauder’s management might have taken the view it is better to be cautious now and over-deliver, than continue with high expectations and fail to sell enough products,” said
Dan Coatsworth, investment analyst at AJ Bell.
The company expects annual organic sales to fall 1 per cent to 2 per cent, compared with its previous forecast for a 1-per-cent decrease to a 1-per-cent increase.
Third-quarter organic net sales in the Americas grew 1 per cent, with a 3-per-cent rise in the Asia Pacific region.
Last month, European rival L’Oreal also beat sales expectations and eased concerns about waning demand in the U.S. and China - the two biggest beauty markets.
“The sector has held better than I expected and the question really around luxury and personal luxury goods is whether 2024 will be a hard or soft landing ... so far it speaks to the
narrative of a soft landing,” said Javier Gonzalez Lastra, luxury-focused portfolio manager at Tema ETFs.
Estee now expects full-year 2024 adjusted profit per share between US$2.14 and US$2.24, compared with a prior forecast of $2.08 to $2.23.
Net sales rose 5 per cent to US$3.94-billion, compared with LSEG estimates of US$3.91-billion. Adjusted profit of 97 US cents per share surpassed expectations of 49 US cents.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-wednesday-may-1-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240501ek51001up

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

109/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

City

Quebec urged to adopt AI framework law; Think tank seeks responsible, ethical development of use
FRÉDÉRIC TOMESCO
924 words
7 February 2024
Montreal Gazette
MTLG
Early
A6
English
Copyright © 2024 Montreal Gazette

Quebec should move fast to adopt a framework law dedicated to the deployment of artificial intelligence while modernizing labour regulations and social policies, a new report says.
Titled Ready for AI, the 165-page document was released Monday by the Quebec Innovation Council, a non-profit organization, after about nine months of consultations and public
forums that involved about 250 experts and 1,500 people. Its 12 main recommendations aim to ensure the responsible and ethical development and use of AI in the province.
As AI use spreads, more experts are sounding the alarm to highlight the risks associated with an uncontrolled development of the technology. Last spring, more than 1,100 executives,
thinkers and researchers published an open letter urging a pause in the development of large AI systems because of risks that humans could gradually lose control of civilization.
" Artificial intelligence is playing an increasingly important role in all spheres of society," Quebec Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon said Monday during an online news conference.
"Its applications and potential repercussions are far-reaching and difficult to imagine."
While Quebec is encouraging companies to adopt and use AI to be more competitive, "we have to do it the correct way," he added. "We have to know AI well to supervise it well."
AI "needs a legal framework that's adapted to a new reality," added Quebec's chief innovator, Luc Sirois, who oversaw the report's production. Given the speed at which AI is spreading
and its multisectoral and transborder nature, "we need new ways of doing from a legislative point of view."
Authors of the report are also urging Quebec to delegate responsibility for the application of the framework law to an authority that's independent of the executive branch.
Giving such powers to an outside body "will guarantee an efficient, effective, agile and uniform implementation and supervision" of AI, Sirois said.
"An independent authority that's equipped with specialized expertise can better meet the complex challenges posed by AI. It can act rapidly, intervene when needed, ensuring the
protection of citizens and the flexibility that's required by a constantly changing environment."
Quebec's government "takes note of these recommendations," Fitzgibbon told reporters. The various ministries concerned will analyze the report and implement its recommendations,
he added.
Cybersecurity Minister Eric Caire, who also took part in the news conference, said that his ministry - together with the justice ministry - has begun a review of Quebec's legislative
framework. He didn't elaborate.
The report identifies four key areas that will be affected by AI: work, democracy, culture and the environment.
Though integrating AI into the workplace promises to boost productivity, it could also trigger substantial job losses by making some professions obsolete. A World Economic Forum
study released last year estimated that 14 million jobs, or two per cent of existing employment, could disappear by 2027 because of AI.
Labour laws and social policies should be modernized to mitigate this risk, the Quebec report's authors conclude.
"We want to prevent the rapid transformation of the working world because of AI from accentuating social inequalities and slowing down the social and professional acceptability of AI's
deployment," Sirois said.
Since AI also amplifies misinformation, steps should be taken to protect democracy, the innovation council says. So-called generative AI , which can easily produce text, images, audio
and video clips, is particularly risky.
With this in mind, the council is calling on the government to strengthen Élections Québec's capacity to study the impact of AI on the integrity of the electoral process and on citizen
participation.
Efforts should also be made to protect Quebec democracy against the harmful effects of certain uses of AI, and to explore how the technology could be used to support democratic
deliberation, the report says.
"There is real danger, and not only with deepfakes and misinformation," Sirois said. He cited "the ability of artificial intelligence to be unstoppable in interacting with citizens."
AI's effects also extend to culture.
Technology's ability to transform creation and distribution means that Quebec will need to modernize copyright laws to protect artists and improve the discoverability of Quebec cultural
content on digital platforms, the report says.
While AI offers potential in the fight against climate change , its environmental impacts - such as greenhouse gas emissions and contaminations linked to the extraction of rare metals must be evaluated and curtailed, the report says. Quebec is therefore urged to support research into the environmental impacts of AI and to develop methods for assessing its
ecological footprint.
Training will be crucial if Quebecers want to cope with the nascent technological revolution , the report also says.
"Quebec must prepare its population for artificial intelligence ," Sirois said.
"From primary school to continuing education, we must encourage a mastering of the technology, critical thinking and the human competencies of the 21st century. Informing on the
issues of AI, reinforcing the digital literacy, and adapting educative, academic and training programs all through life is a must." ftomesco@postmedia.com
PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon says the province will implement the 12 main recommendations of a report released Monday by the Quebec Innovation Council on how to
use .; PIERRE OBENDRAUF / Economy Minister Pierre Fitzgibbon says the province will implement the 12 main recommendations of a report released Monday by the Quebec Innovation Council on
how to use . [MTGZ_20240207_Early_A6_01_I001.jpg];
Postmedia Network Inc.
Document MTLG000020240207ek270000i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

110/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: What to know about Nvidia today; Earnings from the world’s wealthiest company spotlight the new and
uncertain generative AI landscape
Joe Castaldo
1060 words
20 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Good morning. I’m Joe Castaldo, a Globe business reporter who focuses on artificial intelligence . I’ll be subbing in for Chris this morning, and taking a look at the world’s wealthiest
company as it reports earnings after the close today. Nvidia Corp.’s stock has played a large part in propelling the year’s broader market gains – but its future might not be so
straightforward. Hope you aren’t afraid of heights. More on that, but first:
In the news
The federal government is aligning itself with the incoming Trump administration as it leaves open the possibility [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-canada-weighscutting-mexico-out-of-trade-pact-as-trump-taps-pro/] of a new deal that would exclude Mexico. This coincides with the announcement that Howard Lutnick would serve
[https://theglobeandmail.com/world/us-politics/article-trump-chooses-billionaire-key-transition-adviser-howard-lutnick-for/] as U.S. commerce secretary, in charge of his “tariff and trade
agenda.”
Canada Post’s growing part-time, temporary workforce has become a stumbling block [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canada-posts-growing-part-time-temp-workforce-a-key-part-of-labour/] in negotiations for a new collective agreement.
TC Energy Corp. says a $1-billion deal touted as Canada’s largest equity purchase by an Indigenous partnership may not be completed as planned
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-indigenous-equity-stake-in-natural-gas-pipelines-now-in-doubt-tc/] .
Happening today
* Earnings include Metro Inc., Nvidia, and cloud-based data storage giant Snowflake Inc.
* Be prepared: Alert Ready is testing out its emergency alerting system across Canada today. Here [https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/public-test-of-alert-ready-on-november-202024-806632711.html] are the times in each province.
In focus
Nvidia on the rise
Ilya Sutskever, the co-founder of OpenAI, has touched off a rollicking debate in the artificial intelligence world.
And this time he didn’t even fire Sam Altman [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-how-openais-ilya-sutskever-went-from-university-of-toronto-ai-whiz-to/] .
Instead, he said this [https://www.reuters.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/openai-rivals-seek-new-path-smarter-ai-current-methods-hit-limitations-2024-11-11/] : “The 2010s were
the age of scaling, now we’re back in the age of wonder and discovery once again. Everyone is looking for the next big thing.”
Why is that noteworthy?
Sutskever, who recently co-founded a company called Safe Superintelligence, is a machine-learning guru who has played a pivotal role in the generative AI era in which we now
live, for better or worse. One of his chief contributions has been the notion of scaling: if you throw lots of data into an AI model and fire up lots of graphics processing units (GPUs),
you’ll get better results.
And he’s been right. Scale is a big reason why OpenAI’s GPT-4 appears to be so much smarter and more capable than previous releases.
But now Sutskever is saying the gains from scaling are starting to plateau, raising questions about the future of AI development and everyone’s favourite GPU supplier, Nvidia, which
reports earnings today.
His comments come as Reuters [https://www.reuters.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/openai-rivals-seek-new-path-smarter-ai-current-methods-hit-limitations-2024-11-11/] ,
Bloomberg [https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-11-13/openai-google-and-anthropic-are-struggling-to-build-more-advanced-ai] and The Information
[https://www.theinformation.com/articles/following-openai-google-changes-tack-to-overcome-slowdown-in-ai-improvement] have reported that developers including OpenAI, Google and
Anthropic are having trouble building more advanced AI models. One question they’re grappling with: is it worth it to spend millions of dollars on more GPUs just to eke out some
meagre performance improvements?
Scale is king
The drive for scale has pushed Nvidia’s stock price into the stratosphere and prompted other companies to hoard GPUs in the belief the world will need endless computing power for
these huge AI models.
David Cahn, a partner at Sequoia Capital, has called this idea a “delusion [https://www.sequoiacap.com/article/ais-600b-question/] ,” and questioned where the revenue is going to
come from to justify the expense. Similarly, Goldman Sachs said in a report this month that everyone is searching for AI applications that will actually make money, noting investor
concern about “capital incineration for early investments.”
Off the wall
Worries that scale has diminishing returns [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-companies-face-growing-competition-slower-technology-gains/] have been prevalent
for a while, in truth, but it could still be too early to draw conclusions. Some in the AI field have been arguing [https://x.com/emollick/status/1856701705544401091] that any concerns
about progress hitting a wall are very premature. Altman himself tweeted cryptically in his all-lowercase-style: “there is no wall.” [https://x.com/sama/status/1856941766915641580]
Others, such as Meta’s chief AI scientist Yann LeCun, have taken a victory lap. “I don’t wanna say, ‘I told you so,’ but I told you so,” he wrote on Threads
[https://www.threads.net/@yannlecun/post/DCTeagdN_th?xmt=AQGzwugSx2clYnCPrawJ8Ait-sjxVVyyDLUThj1y7YGM5w] in response to Sutskever’s comments. He’s long argued that
entirely new approaches are crucial to building more advanced AI systems.
So what should you take away?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

111/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

In your humble correspondent’s opinion, this is a reminder of just how new and uncertain the entire generative AI landscape is, and that technological progress rarely moves in a
straight line.
If Nvidia’s stock price continues to reach new heights, it’s something investors may want to keep in mind as well.
Charted
‘A tad more stickiness in inflation than expected’
The Consumer Price Index rose to 2 per cent [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-inflation-rises-to-2-per-cent-dulling-case-for-big-boc-rate-cut/] in October, up from 1.6
per cent in September, says Statistics Canada. The report weakens the case for the Bank of Canada to make another outsized cut to interest rates next month. Gasoline had a tangible
effect on yesterday’s results, acting as less of a drag on the headline inflation rate.
The outlook
On our radar and reading list
Bottled up: The biggest bottled-water producer in Canada is pulling out [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-bottled-water-producer-pulls-out-of-ontario/] of Ontario, for
reasons unknown. However, after nearly 20 years of protest, water activists are pretty pumped.
Paying up: Canadians love these cards offered by up-and-coming challenger banks and fintech startups. But they don’t all protect your money
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/personal-finance/household-finances/article-canadians-love-these-payment-cards-but-they-dont-all-protect-your/] the same way.
Cozying up: Why Canada should get closer [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/commentary/article-canada-should-get-closer-to-the-non-western-brics-economic-alliance/] to
the non-Western BRICS economic alliance.
Up next: We’re watching earnings tomorrow from Deere & Co. – an American institution caught in Trump’s crosshairs over his planned tariffs.
Morning update
Global markets edged higher [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today-1113/]
as a cooling of tensions between Russia and the West supported some investor confidence ahead of Nvidia earnings. Wall Street futures were in positive territory while TSX futures
were little changed .
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was up 0.3 per cent in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 slipped 0.08 per cent, Germany’s DAX gained 0.32 per cent and France’s CAC 40
advanced 0.16 per cent.
In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei closed 0.16 per cent lower, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng climbed 0.21 per cent.
The Canadian dollar traded at 71.46 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: What to know about Nvidia today [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-what-toknow-about-nvidia-today/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241120ekbk00209

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

112/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Insight

Google's dominance leaves little choice on AI scraping
Julia Love and Davey Alba
1581 words
1 September 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
IN1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The convenient artificial intelligence answers Google now puts at the top of its search results come at a steep cost to websites users would otherwise visit. But many site owners say
they can't afford to block Google's AI from summarizing their content.
That's because the Google tool that sifts through web content to come up with its AI answers is the same one that keeps track of web pages for search results, according to publishers.
Blocking Alphabet Inc.'s Google the way sites have blocked some of its AI competitors would also hamper a site's ability to be discovered online.
Google's dominance in search - which a U.S. federal court ruled recently is an illegal monopoly - is giving it a decisive advantage in the brewing AI wars, which search startups and
publishers say is unfair as the industry takes shape. The dilemma is particularly acute for publishers, which face a choice between offering up their content for use by AI models that
could make their sites obsolete and disappearing from Google search, a top source of traffic.
"It becomes like an existential crisis for these companies," said Joe Ragazzo, publisher of the news site Talking Points Memo. "These are two bad options. You drop out and you die
immediately, or you partner with them and you probably just die slowly, because eventually they're not going to need you either."
Google said AI Overviews - the summaries displayed at the top of Google search - are part of its long-standing commitment to serve higher quality information and bolster opportunities
for publishers and other businesses.
"Every day, Google sends billions of clicks to sites across the web, and we intend for this long-established value exchange with websites to continue," a Google spokesperson said in a
statement. "With AI Overviews, people find Search more helpful and they're coming back to search more, creating new opportunities for content to be discovered."
Since its earliest days, Google has deployed a piece of software known as the Googlebot to visit or "crawl" millions of websites, building up a detailed repository of the global internet.
That index has posed a daunting barrier to entry for companies that have sought to build rival search engines over the years - even ones with deep pockets, like Microsoft Corp.
The rise of generative AI has touched off a new wave of startups seeking to offer search products in which AI models deliver succinct answers to users' questions. The chatbots'
popularity has sparked a panic within Google about the future of its search engine, which for so long seemed invincible. But before these startups can truly threaten the search giant's
business, they must crawl the web. And that's no easy feat.
Being crawled costs website owners money, computing power and storage, so many publishers include a file that sets out rules for bots visiting their sites. The companies given the
most leeway are usually Google and Microsoft's Bing, which can drive traffic to sites through their search engines.
But search startups can't promise such traffic before gaining traction - which is one reason why the young firms have begun striking deals to pay publishers to license content, said Alex
Rosenberg, chief executive officer of Tako Inc., an AI startup.
"Now you have a bunch of tech companies that are paying for content, they're paying for access to that because they need it to be able to compete in any kind of serious way,"
Rosenberg said. "Whereas for Google, they don't really have to do that."
Amid a wave of deal-making between media companies and AI startups, Google has been a notable holdout. With the exception of a reported $60-million (U.S.) deal with Reddit Inc.,
Google has signalled to publishers behind closed doors that it is not interested in negotiating, according to two people with knowledge of the matter, who asked not to be identified
because the information is private.
Media companies have little leverage in these conversations. Earlier this year, Google rolled out AI Overviews, in which the company uses AI to give succinct answers to some of users'
questions at the top of the search page. Publishers were immediately concerned about the impact the answers could have on their traffic but had no clear way to address those fears.
Google uses a separate crawler for some AI products, such as its chatbot Gemini. But its main crawler, the Googlebot, serves both AI Overviews and Google search. A company
spokesperson said Googlebot governs AI Overviews because AI and the company's search engine are deeply entwined. The spokesperson added that its search results page shows
information in a variety of formats, including images and graphics. Google also said publishers can block specific pages or parts of pages from appearing in AI Overviews in search
results - but that would also likely bar those snippets from appearing across all of Google's other search features, too, including web link listings.
Many publishers, which often rely on search engines for at least half their traffic, aren't willing to take the risk of minimizing their reach.
Google's position "understates the significant risk this poses to content creators, particularly those who rely on search visibility for their livelihood," said Marc McCollum, who heads up
innovation at Raptive, which represents publishers and influencers. "By opting out, creators may inadvertently reduce their overall search presence, which could harm their ability to
reach audiences and generate revenue."
Kyle Wiens, the CEO of iFixit, a website that publishes free online repair guides for consumer electronics, said the site's relationship with Google is "much more tenuous" than with
other AI companies.
"I can block ClaudeBot from indexing us without harming our business," Wiens wrote in an email, referring to the bot from generative AI startup Anthropic. "But if I block Googlebot, we
lose traffic and customers."
Google's deal with Reddit, where millions of users engage in heated debates about niche topics, offers the company a treasure trove of information for AI models. The deal coincided
with changes Google's made that boosted the presence of results from forums like Reddit in search results, driving huge gains in traffic to the social media site. A spokesperson for
Reddit said improvements in product quality and speed have also contributed to the growth in traffic.
Search startup Perplexity is in talks with Reddit about licensing content, but the Google deal has set a rate that is hard for a startup to match, according to a person familiar with the
matter. Google said the deal with Reddit is a far-reaching partnership that covers more than just training data. The spokesperson for Reddit declined to comment on business
discussions. Perplexity declined to comment.
Other search startups have concluded that the data is simply out of reach.
"We would need 20 years of our current revenue just to pay Reddit," said Vladimir Prelovac, founder of Kagi, a search startup. "That's not even a possibility I'm entertaining."
Small startups aren't alone in their struggles. OpenAI recently launched SearchGPT, a test version of its wildly popular chatbot tailored for search. Yet popular websites including
Amazon, Goodreads and Uniqlo have blocked the GPT crawler from their sites, according to public documentation, potentially spelling trouble for OpenAI's ambitions in search. OpenAI

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

113/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

has said sites may appear in its search results even if they choose to exclude their content from AI training.
Prelovac said at least half of Kagi's costs go toward crawling and other sources of search data. A detailed index of the web is table stakes for a search engine, to offer users a detailed
view into the contents of the internet. Yet for companies seeking to answer users' questions directly using AI, a model popularized by ChatGPT , the data takes on another level of
importance, Prelovac said.
" Generative AI models on their own are not very smart," Prelovac said. "In order to have any sort of high quality generative AI output, you need to have access to that same search
index."
The ubiquity of robots.txt files, which set guidelines for crawling, forces startups to make complex decisions, said Richard Socher, founder of search startup You.com. The files have not
been found to be legally binding, so companies may crawl public data so long as no log-in or subscriber credentials are required, Socher said.
"When we do crawl, we try not to overly burden any website," he said. "Any website that has a robots.txt file that allows only Google to crawl and nobody else essentially supports a
Google search monopoly."
For Wiens, the iFixit CEO, the advantage that Google has over other AI companies because of its search empire is at the heart of antitrust issues for the company. "Splitting Google
search from their AI work," he said, "would deconflict things."
Search engine DuckDuckGo said the technological shifts underway in search make "Google's index related to antitrust concerns even more problematic."
Regardless of the outcome of the antitrust case, the changes underway in the search landscape underscore the importance for publishers of controlling their own destiny and not
becoming overly reliant on any one tech platform, said TPM's Ragazzo.
"Our belief is you have to form real relationships with readers," Ragazzo said, "and that's how you build a publication that can withstand different eras."
Bloomberg
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240901ek910006a

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

114/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

Taking stock of the internet 30 years on; Today's World Wide Web a letdown, Jake Pitre says
JAKE PITRE
686 words
12 March 2024
Montreal Gazette
MTLG
Early
A6
English
Copyright © 2024 Montreal Gazette

As a child, when you imagined the future , did it look like the world of 2024? Profit-seeking artificial intelligence chatbots and environmentally harmful cryptocurrencies? Social
media platforms cluttered with ads and banning news content for Canadians? I doubt it.
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the World Wide Web, or at least the version of the internet as we know it today. In 1994, when the first web browser debuted, tech evangelists
were effusive with dreams of the technological future as a place of free information, expression and opportunity. However, as we know, the internet quickly became more privatized,
more extractive and less wondrous.
This is an opportune moment, then, to reconsider the past 30 years and take stock of what went wrong.
The first problem may be that our tech leaders - from Mark Zuckerberg to OpenAI chief executive Sam Altman - seem to think they can force their latest fixations on the rest of us with
impunity.
Zuckerberg's mission to turn Facebook into Meta and embrace the metaverse, inspired by Neal Stephenson's dystopian 1992 novel Snow Crash, stirred much investment, even though
one wonders whether anyone actually seems excited about it. Are you? Altman's company may almost single-handedly change how many of us do our jobs with the imposition of
generative AI , which can often make our jobs harder, not easier.
The way I see it, this hubris among our corporate leaders is merely a symptom of a much larger problem, which is that the future has become the domain not of governments,
organizations or citizens, but of technology and, more to the point, the companies and executives that wield it.
The risk is that the whims of Zuckerberg, Altman, Elon Musk and other "great male geniuses" of Silicon Valley come to decide what the rest of us deal with, and what seems
imaginable, thereby shaping and limiting our own imaginations. Meanwhile, governments and policymakers struggle to keep up, let alone react.
This is not what many dreamed up in 1994 as the internet emerged. Those objectives - from open-source values to democratic empowerment - remain a part of the story of the internet,
but largely feel forgotten or unviable, at least under current conditions.
The narratives of the future sold by today's Big Tech have shaped the discourse for us all. I call these "unwanted utopias" - terrific for the Zuckerbergs and Musks of the world, but not
very utopian for you and me.
So what do we do now? First, we must recognize that what a technology can do is less important than the ways in which it is actually used. This, I believe, should be our guiding
principle as the internet enters its fourth decade.
We must ask ourselves whether the future that is being sold to us has our interests in mind. Is generative AI being implemented to make your life easier, or is it going to make your
job more complicated or serve as an excuse to pay you less? Second, we must take that recognition as a signal that no technology is inevitable. Is the metaverse a box that cannot be
closed, or is it possible to meaningfully debate whether we want it at all? Third, we must realize that any story is fallible. As many of these companies are now facing a new reality
where constant growth seems more difficult, their promises begin to look less appealing, less trustworthy. Maybe that's because they are.
Of course, considering how the internet has evolved, and how entrenched in its ways it has become, it's hard to imagine how we can reclaim the future from Big Tech's elite and
recover the opportunities it initially presented in 1994. But can you imagine where we'll be if we don't? Perhaps, in 2024, we can start to undo some of what's been done. Jake Pitre is a
public scholar and doctoral candidate in film and moving image studies at Concordia University.
Postmedia Network Inc.
Document MTLG000020240312ek3c0000i

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

115/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: A revamp in retail; Plus: Central banks react to cooling inflation, the G7 summit kicks off, and the Pope
weighs in on AI
Chris Wilson-Smith
1567 words
13 June 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Inflation is cooling around the world. But as central banks mark milestones in their fight to tame the rising cost of living, you could be forgiven if it felt like you just paid $10 for three
blueberries the other day. And you wouldn’t be alone: Prices might be cooling, but Dollarama’s earnings show consumers are still seeking relief.
In today’s edition
* Discount shopping: Dollarama grows as shoppers seek relief
* At the G7 summit: In search of world peace, and the Pope’s take on AI
* The hold steady: The Fed plays it slow
RETAIL
Dollarama and the new discount reality
Dollarama Inc.’s profits jumped by 20 per cent in its first quarter as Canadians turn to discount stores looking for relief. This follows a slate of recent retail news that point to the
different ways consumers and companies are reacting to a new inflation environment. I asked veteran retailing reporter Susan Krashinsky Robertson to walk us through the aisles of a
shifting consumer landscape:
What do Dollarama’s earnings say about consumer spending?
No surprise here: Canadian consumers are in pain, and they’re looking for ways to cut back wherever they can. The declining rate of inflation is good news , but it doesn’t feel that
good – because it just means that prices aren’t rising as fast as they have been over the past two years. People are still faced with a new reality where their dollars don’t go as far. And
discount retailers have seen more traffic to their stores as a result.
Is Dollarama’s success unique, and have larger competitors taken notice?
As ubiquitous as Dollarama stores can seem to be in some neighbourhoods, the company clearly believes it has more room to grow. It currently has 1,551 locations in Canada, and is
planning to open 60 to 70 new stores this year – roughly in line with the pace of expansion in recent years. They’re not the only discount retailer making these kinds of moves: The CEO
of Walmart Canada recently told me [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-walmart-canada-growth-groceries/] that the company wants to open more stores in this country,
for example. Our largest grocer, Loblaw Cos. Ltd., is converting dozens of stores to its discount formats such as No Frills and Maxi, and opening new discount locations too. Loblaw
recently began testing out smaller-format No Frills stores, to try to reach shoppers in urban centres.
How is the slowing pace of inflation playing out across the retail space?
If a store sells the kind of products people have no choice but to buy – like groceries, pet food, soap – they’re probably doing okay. But retailers that sell “discretionary” products have
noticed shoppers holding on to their wallets more tightly. Canadian Tire (which sells a bit of both) has reported declines in its discretionary categories for months now
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canadian-tire-reports-lower-sales-in-first-quarter-cites-challenging/] . Liquidators – which help clear product for stores going out of
business or those in need of moving product – are busy [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-insolvencies-shifts-in-consumer-behaviour-keep-liquidators-busy/] . Before
its owners took the company private recently, Indigo reported [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-indigo-reports-70-per-cent-drop-in-quarterly-profit-as-it-borrows-more/]
its sales were way down, even during the holiday season that is usually its bread and butter.
So, how do we square a mass tightening of wallets with recent news of some retailers growing?
There are still people out there shopping, and not just for things they strictly need. Harry Rosen executives say they had record revenues last year, approaching $350-million, and the
company is investing [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-harry-rosen-launching-50-million-overhaul-of-its-retail-stores-over/] in updating its stores. (If you have the
money for an Armani sport jacket, you’re maybe not as price-sensitive.) But it’s not only luxury retailers that are seeing growth. Quebec retailer Simons also had record sales last year,
and that company is spending $75-million to build new stores [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-simons-to-open-two-department-stores-in-toronto/] in two of the
highest-profile malls in the country.
ECONOMY
On the menu at the G7 summit
Against a global backdrop of unhappy electorates and economic uncertainty, Italy is welcoming Group of Seven leaders into the Borgo Egnazia – a swish southern resort featuring a
Michelin-starred restaurant and a prestigious golf course overlooking the Adriatic sea.
~Primo~
Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni’s challenge as host, The Globe’s Eric Reguly writes [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-at-g7-in-italy-pm-melonis-clout-may-be-theticket-to-ukraine/] from Bari, is to find broad support – and constructive criticism – for the pressing issues of her mandate: Ukraine [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/ukraine/] ,
Gaza [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/topics/israel-hamas-war/] , climate and migration.
* “Speed is essential. The war is going badly for Ukraine, whose military is running severely short of all types of weapons. The G7 is also aware that Donald Trump could win the U.S.
election in November and stop sending weapons to Kyiv while he tries to impose a Russia-friendly peace deal on Ukraine.”
~Secondo~
To be sure, Gaza and Ukraine will carry most of the agenda. But climate change and AI will also be at the forefront of the three-day summit.
Coal’s notes: In April, the G7 climate, energy and environment ministers announced an ambitious goal to kill off coal by 2035. Met with skepticism, their messaging coming out of this
summit will be worth following.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

116/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Pontificating on AI: Pope Francis, the first pontiff to attend a G7 summit, will take part in a discussion about artificial intelligence . He has broader concerns about AI, but comes from
a place of personal experience.
* An AI-generated image of him wearing full-body puffer coat went viral [https://www.reuters.com/world/pope-francis-victim-ai-warns-against-its-perverse-dangers-2024-01-24/] last year.
* And in his annual New Year’s Day message [https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/messages/peace/documents/20231208-messaggio-57giornatamondiale-pace2024.html] , he
warned of the risks posed by the “immense expansion” of AI technology .
* “Freedom and peaceful coexistence are threatened whenever human beings yield to the temptation to selfishness, self-interest, the desire for profit and the thirst for power,” he wrote.
“We thus have a duty to broaden our gaze and to direct techno-scientific research towards the pursuit of peace and the common good, in the service of the integral development of
individuals and communities.”
* And to ban fake coats on popes, presumably.
~Dolce~
The debate comes as an artificial intelligence arms race intensifies – and attracts more scrutiny from markets and regulators. The pace of the news and the innovations are such
that we don’t get to ask fundamental questions, such as: Why do companies keep releasing AI-powered apps that tell people to, say, search out and enjoy wild mushrooms that might
prove deadly? They know the hype will die as errors are spotted and elevated to worldwide meme status.
So, why risk the negative attention? Big Tech is fine with launching unreliable AI apps, Joe Castaldo reports [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-why-big-tech-is-ok-withlaunching-janky-ai-apps/] .
* The concept of a minimum viable product, in which a company releases a barebones product to sort out customer needs before moving to a full version, is being pushed to the limit by
generative AI companies.
* “Depending on whom you ask, the approach is either reckless or a sign that we need to reset our expectations of generative AI ,” he writes.
Inflation fight
In the United States: The U.S. Federal Reserve held interest rates steady and pushed out the start of rate cuts to perhaps as late as December.
The decision was itself expected. But Fed Chair Jerome Powell said a report showing that the consumer price index eased last month more than expected isn’t enough to instill “greater
confidence” in the broader direction.
“It’s only one reading,” he said.
In Canada: A week after the Bank of Canada cut its key interest rate for the first time in more than four years, Governor Tiff Macklem said the bank needs to restore public trust.
Speaking on a panel [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-bank-of-canada-needs-to-rebuild-public-trust-after-inflation-governor/] in Montreal, Macklem said the bank
needs to find ways to explain its policies to a wide range of audiences, including families trying to navigate uncertain times.
“We need to meet people where they are and ensure they understand what we’re doing and why we’re doing it,” he said.
At home: Literally, my house. We’d like to know whether and when more cuts might come, no matter how much money we’re likely to save
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/personal-finance/household-finances/article-by-the-numbers-how-a-first-rate-cut-will-affect-mortgages-and-other/] . Every dollar counts.
(See: Dollarama, above.)
ON OUR RADAR
Out of bounds: Toronto’s Anson Funds has reached a settlement [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-torontos-anson-funds-reaches-settlement-with-us-regulator-overshort/] with U.S. regulator over short-selling practices.
Out West: In wake of National Bank’s deal for CWB, Alberta’s premier hopes its HQ [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-national-bank-deal-for-cwb-a-vote-ofconfidence-in-western-canada/] (and corporate income tax) stays where it is.
Out of office: U.S. investment bank Stifel Financial Corp. is closing its office in Calgary [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-investment-banker-stifel-closes-calgaryoffice-cuts-about-35-staff/] , a major symbolic loss to the city and province.
Morning markets
World markets were mostly lower [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today1004/] after the U.S. Federal Reserve forecast just one interest rate cut this year, fewer than previously projected, even as inflation cooled in May.
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was down 0.89 per cent in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 slid 0.51 per cent, Germany’s DAX fell1.16 per cent and France’s CAC 40
dropped 1.31 per cent.
In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei closed 0.4 per cent lower at 38,720.47, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng rose 0.97 per cent to 18,112.63.
The Canadian dollar traded at 72.75 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: A revamp in retail [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-a-revamp-in-retail/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240613ek6d001up

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

117/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

David Rosenberg: My epiphany - and why this bull market may not be as irrational as I had thought; Rethinking the “bubble
thesis, and why I’m turning more positive on bonds too
David Rosenberg
2739 words
5 December 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

It’s high time for me to stop pontificating on all the reasons why the U.S. stock market is crazily overvalued and all the reasons to be bearish based on all the variables I have relied on
in the past — from valuation, to sentiment, to overcrowded positioning. So, what I am going to start doing is assessing what it is the market is saying, because the market can certainly
move to excesses in both directions and make faulty assumptions, but the market is not stupid.
What is the market telling us, in other words? Especially since this bull phase has now lasted long enough that those of us who have been on the wrong side of the trade need to take a
different tack. This is not about throwing in the towel as much as trying to get a grip on what is going on beyond just calling this a “bubble” every single day. There must be more than
that to what we have been seeing over the past two-plus years.
The AI-Induced “Model Shift”
The market is telling us that we are in a “Model Shift” when it comes to future growth and profits. The S&P 500, by its nature, is a long-duration animal, which means that gazing at the
trailing or one-year forward P/E multiple is looking at things over a lagged or coincident time frame. Investors are clearly looking out beyond one year across an entire gamut of
indicators and developments, so the classic way we look at valuations may not be appropriate today. While we may well be in a bubble, it may take years to find out, as was the case
with the Internet in the mid-to-late 1990s — a period of high and rising productivity and profits growth, which only came crashing down once all the excess supply and malinvestment
was exposed when the earnings cycle in Tech peaked out and rolled over in spectacular fashion beginning in 2000. Keep in mind that back then, the Greenspan Fed was busy raising
rates while today’s Powell Fed is cutting rates, and the only question is how much there is left in the easing cycle. One can also state the case that lower interest rates mean a lower
discount factor with respect to the present value of future cash-flow streams — another item not worth debating since it is nothing more than a truism. But as we saw then and are
witnessing today, a speculative asset class like equities will always price in a certain future , and when we have technological breakthroughs as we have with AI, the stock market is
going to extend its time horizon, build in expectations that transcend just one year, and a bear market only ensues if and when these expectations prove to have been excessive.
That day may well come, but Mr. Market has been saying for some time: “not quite yet.”
So, the lesson and epiphany for me is the realization that it is not helpful to be looking at lofty multiples on a one-year trailing or one-year forward basis in an era where we are going
through a major technological revolution . The benefits are next to impossible to estimate, but the one thing we know about the equity market is that it typically is a very forgiving asset
class. And the market clearly continues to anticipate and price in a future boom in productivity that will lead to a secular shift in the trendline for corporate profitability. It may be wrong,
but that is the bet — and it does not look as though Mr. Market is about to fold. Not at least until we actually do get an earnings recession, or all those AI and related orders don’t end up
getting filled and we find out that the TAM (Total Addressable Market) was far too inflated. It doesn’t seem as though we are at that point yet, but we will need to keep a firm eye on the
supply-demand backdrop for AI, just as everyone should have been doing for fiber optics and telecom equipment of all kinds in the Internet mania in the late 1990s.
That is the first part of this revelation: the fact that generative AI is a game- changer for the future . And if it is, then the multiples based on a long time frame may not be in a bubble
at all. This comes back to the view that traditional valuations, at the least, are not that helpful right now. If it weren’t for the “Model Shift” generated by the AI boom, which is spreading to
all sorts of industries and triggering a rare significant expansion in R&D spending (which shows up in GDP but not in the monthly durable goods orders and shipments data), it would be
easy to label a 22x one-year forward P/E multiple as some sort of bubble. But I now realize that investors have shifted out their earnings projections way into the future , and if the
technology experts are prescient, this will be a difference-maker from a productivity growth backdrop in years to come, and at a time when the pandemic has unleashed an unexpected
upward shift in the productivity curve. One productivity enhancer followed by another.
Now, it needs to be said that no, this is not the case where I wasn’t on top of what was happening in this technology wave over the past year. We published reports on the outlook for AI
and also held a special AI webcast at the beginning of 2024. What I clearly underestimated was the dramatic impact this was going to exert on market psychology and the powerful
upward shift in investors’ long-term earnings expectations that were the primary drivers of valuations this past year. And I have gained a greater appreciation that it is going to take a
whole lot to upset this apple cart and trigger a fundamental re-evaluation of what AI will exert on productivity growth and profitability in the future .
Turning a Bit More Positive on Bonds Too
As for the bond market implications, this is a wash: higher productivity growth ipso facto means a higher real interest rate, but it also means lower inflation expectations . It is
extremely difficult at the present time to statistically determine which one will dominate the other, but there is no doubt that higher productivity growth reduces business costs, improves
margins, and is a structural positive underpinning to the stock market. This has never been a point of debate with me, but I come back to this significant point, which is that this is what
investors are pricing in: the future , and not just 2025 and 2026, but the next decade. Again, this is not abnormal in the context of an inflection point in the technology curve, and we will
only likely find out in the course of time whether or not what we are experiencing today is indeed a true bubble. This is where my thinking has changed . I have shifted from my view
that we are in a classic bubble to now questioning — not totally abandoning, but indeed questioning — that thesis.
A Business-Friendly Trump Also Needs to Be Addressed
Then we have to layer something else on this technology breakthrough, which is the political dynamics. I am not convinced that Donald Trump is going to get his tax cuts through a
House that is replete with fiscal conservatives on both sides of the aisle and where the GOP has a razor-thin majority. The appetite for more deficit finance in Congress is thin, and even
the Democrats recognize that the blowout budget gaps of these past several years were a huge mistake. Of course, the 2017 tax cuts about to sunset next year will be extended, the
only question is whether they will be made permanent. But lower corporate tax rates are basically a side-show, in any event. Investors have been bulled up this past month and have
become even more positive because of three things: (i) we clearly have on our hands a much more pro-business administration; (ii) we have a President who can deregulate a lot on
his own, and, in contrast to deficit-financed tax cuts, there is more than enough Congressional support for “dereg!” That also is going to support a lower corporate cost curve and, as a
stand-alone situation, generate a positive boost for future profits. Finally (iii), we have a move to expand energy production, which will reduce energy costs and that too will help
underpin margins for every other industry outside of the oil & gas sector.
One may wonder what happened to all the tariff fears, but they have abated somewhat because it is becoming clear even before Trump takes office that trade policy is being used as a
tactic to get other countries to change their policies on different fronts. It looks like it is already working, at least in relation to Canada and Mexico. And the markets have given the
proverbial “thumbs up” to many of Donald Trump’s choices for his economics team — a sigh of relief, if you will, that he will be restrained when it comes to engaging in a global tariff
and trade war. China is another matter, but that “cold economic war” continued even under Joe Biden’s tenure. In fact, just a few weeks ago, I exercised caution over the outlook for
both bonds and stocks coming out of my tariff concerns, but these concerns have abated and I have no problem being bullish on the Treasury market again as a result. A short hiatus.
The Economy Is Less Strong Than It Appears (And the Fed Will Keep Cutting Rates Even if It Pauses Near Term)
I was unimpressed with the latest rounds of economic data. The JOLTS data show hirings on a notable downtrend. The ADP report showed acute job weakness in the key smallbusiness sector. The ISM services PMI was quite soft, and the pressure-points on inflation receded. And the Beige Book, while seemingly less pessimistic at the headline level,

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

118/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

revealed a softening underbelly for the labor market with wage growth receding and the wage outlook also under some downward pressure. The Fed likely cuts on December 18th and
sounds cautious while reducing the 2025 dot plots to just two cuts from the four it predicted last September — but this is already priced in, and I would not be surprised to see the
March dot plots next year show more rate cuts coming. While my concern over the Fed’s reaction function with respect to Trump’s tariff (and immigration) policies has not totally abated,
I am feeling better about the situation than I was a few weeks back, so back to business on the bond market. I said I would advocate a return to above-neutral duration once a cloud or
two started to part, and Trump’s cadence so far (though admittedly early days yet) and his picks for key economic positions (especially regarding trade policy) have me, at the margin,
less concerned. I don’t usually whack around an asset mix shift this quickly, but the situation, shall we say, is fluid.
Still Concerned Over Sentiment and Market Positioning — But Any Near-Term Correction (Which I Expect) Will Likely Be Bought (Yet Again)
A few last items to cover before wrapping up. As I said, this piece is about a revelation, an epiphany, and an explanation as to why this market in Bob Farrell style has definitely gone
much further than anyone thought. It’s not just me — the consensus S&P 500 target for the end of 2024 published in December of last year was near 4,900 and change , and the index
is already north of 6,000. Some will obviously say, “Where were you last year?” and others will say, “Rosie, stick to your guns,” and then there will be a few who will simply say, “Thank
you for updating your thought process.” All that said, I do have concerns over what will happen in the near term because there is a ton of good news being embedded in any valuation
measure, and both sentiment levels and bullish market positioning are simply off the charts.
So, we cannot dismiss the potential for some near-term rounds of profit-taking or early-2025 rebalancing or even the prospect that we get hit with some unanticipated adverse
economic news or a more hawkish Fed that could trigger a drawdown of even 5% or 10%. Ergo, the answer is no — I am not advocating a move to jump into the equity market today
or even tomorrow. I expect a correction to take place. But the issue is what then to do with any correction in the context of what does indeed appear to be a secular bull market, and my
shift in view, for lack of a more sophisticated term, will be to “buy that dip.”
For this bull market to confront a more difficult experience where “buying the dips” will not work requires one of: a shift in Fed policy towards a tightening cycle (which will require a
surprising revival in inflation), convincing signs that the recession that so far has been averted finally does arrive, Trump following through on his tariff pledges, or evidence that the AI
spending craze is stalling out (which, after all, is what happened in the dotcom cycle in 2000 — but remember, that did come about five years after the Internet went viral with the
Netscape IPO in 1995). But if any or all of these developments do not occur, there really is nothing to stand in the way of this bull market being extended, intermittent corrections
notwithstanding.
I do hate to ever use the term “new era” or “it’s different this time,” but we do not have a large sample size of data points historically on such major inflection points on the technology
curve. But when they do occur, what you do find is what we have on our hands today, which, once again, is an investment community lengthening their investment horizons and
rendering classic valuation metrics obsolete (at least for the environment we find ourselves in currently). That’s the major point. Once (if?) we ever do revert to a backdrop where
investors shorten their timelines to what has been the norm of the past, which will mark the end of this technology super-cycle, the gig will be up. Remember what happened in 2022,
just before this AI craze took hold — it was not exactly a pretty picture. The business cycle and market cycle have not been repealed, but I am definitely now keeping a more open mind
that we could end up seeing Bob Farrell’s Rule #4 in that this bull market continues to go further than anyone thinks. The latter part of that rule on not correcting by going sideways is
still relevant, but as we saw in the 1995-2000 Internet era, that fundamental reversal could still be several years away. Like I said — the way to redress the lament of a bear is to keep
an open mind as we head into 2025 and learn from the mistakes of the past year.
David Rosenberg is founder of Rosenberg Research [https://www.rosenbergresearch.com/] . This column was also sent to Rosenberg Research clients Thursday.
Earlier columns from David Rosenberg:
How investors should position themselves for 2025, a year riddled with uncertainty [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-how-investors-shouldposition-themselves-for-2025-a-year-riddled-with/]
It’s time for a broad move into cash. Even most bonds and commodities have become too risky [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-davidrosenberg-its-time-for-a-broad-move-into-cash-even-most-bonds/]
Why I feel sorry for Donald Trump [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-david-rosenberg-why-i-feel-sorry-for-donald-trump/]
Chill, bond investors. There’s no reason to hyperventilate over the inflation threat posed by Trump [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-chillbond-investors-theres-no-reason-to-hyperventilate-over-the/]
Investors are partying like it’s 2016-2018 again under Trump. That’s a mistake [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-david-rosenberg-investorsare-partying-like-its-2016-2018-again-under/]
Be smart with your money. Get the latest investing insights delivered right to your inbox three times a week, with the Globe Investor newsletter. Sign up today
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/newsletters/#newsletter-group-3] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: David Rosenberg: My epiphany - and why this bull market may not be as irrational as I had thought
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-david-rosenberg-my-epiphany-and-why-this-bull-market-may-not-be-as/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241205ekc50040h

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

119/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Opinion

Upholding truth in age of AI
Natalie Turvey
621 words
14 February 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A11
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Imagine a world where half of what you read online is indistinguishable from the truth. And you can't tell the difference between a fake photo and a real one. This is not a dystopian
future ; it's our present reality in the era of artificial intelligence (AI).
At the Canadian Journalism Foundation (CJF), we recognize AI's tremendous potential to support journalism , but we are also acutely aware of its misuse by bad actors to propagate
misinformation. Our latest national study, conducted in October 2023 by Maru Public Opinion, reveals how Canadians are struggling in this new landscape, underscoring the
importance of media literacy in the age of AI.
The study's findings highlight a critical challenge: 58 per cent of the 1,525 Canadians surveyed say they have come across misleading or false AI-generated information on social
media in the past six months. Even more concerning is that nearly half (48 per cent) acknowledge they lack confidence in distinguishing between content created by AI and that created
by humans. And nearly three-quarters (71 per cent) believe governments won't be able to regulate online AI content. These figures are more than just numbers; they signify a significant
hurdle in our digital society.
This dilemma underscores the responsibility of individuals and organizations to cultivate a nuanced understanding of media in the AI era. The CJF's "Keep Truth Human" campaign,
supported by the Google News Initiative, is a response to this urgent need.
Far from just a slogan, the campaign is a call to embrace the positive aspects of AI in journalism while remaining vigilant against its potential misuse.
Our initiative launches in the wake of a recent surge of AI-generated deceptions, such as the troubling spread of deepfake images of Taylor Swift circulating on social media, and the AIgenerated robocall mimicking U.S. President Joe Biden. It includes an interactive news literacy quiz that aims to empower the public in identifying AI-generated misinformation. This
quiz serves as a practical tool, enabling users to refine their ability to discern reality from fiction in a media environment increasingly dominated by AI. Everyone should take it.
Our research reveals an increasing trend among Canadians, especially younger generations, toward experimentation with AI for content creation. This technological adoption is not
inherently negative but highlights the need for robust media literacy to navigate its ethical and factual challenges.
In a recent CJF J-Talk on AI and misinformation, prominent AI and journalism thought leader Charlie Beckett made this compelling statement: " Journalists are supposed to be good
at dealing with complex information and we're supposed to be good at making judgments about reliable sources. AI can help us to do that by monitoring fast-moving stories and helping
us find better information to back up our judgment calls." His insights underscore the pivotal role of media literacy in an AI-driven news landscape.
The CJF is committed to enhancing the understanding of AI's role in news creation and consumption among both the public and journalists . Initiatives like "Keep Truth Human" are
central to our mission, aiming to foster a society that values truth and maintains journalistic integrity amidst AI's rapid advancement.
We are at a crucial juncture in the digital age. As AI evolves, so must our strategies in media literacy. Together, we can ensure that truth remains a fundamental pillar of our society and
that the public is well-equipped to distinguish it within the complexities of the digital world.
Natalie Turvey is the president and executive director of The Canadian Journalism
Foundation.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240214ek2e0009j

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

120/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Keeping focus on the simpler side of AI; With much of this sector's future uncertain, one firm is keeping its sights set on
current abilities
Tara Deschamps
1012 words
2 January 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B2
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

In a world where artificial intelligence has helped professional soccer teams develop game strategies, created a fake viral tune reminiscent of Drake and The Weeknd and played
brewmaster, Nick Frosst loves the simpler uses of the technology.
The Cohere co-founder's eyes light up as he sits in his AI company's Toronto meeting and games room on a dreary day in late November discussing how AI has made it possible to
extract information from resumés, cutting out the tedium of filling out job application questionnaires.
"The mundane use cases are the ones that I'm like, 'Hell yeah,'" said Frosst.
"That's real value. We've solved the problem for somebody."
Cohere develops AI for enterprise use, meaning it helps businesses build powerful applications by using large language models (LLMs) - algorithms that use massive data sets to
recognize, translate, predict or generate text and other content.
But these days, the buzz around AI has moved leaps and bounds ahead of the kinds of commonplace tasks Frosst is excited about.
There's general agreement the technology will disrupt most, if not all, sectors. Some even herald it as an eventual game- changer in the fight against many of humanity's biggest
challenges: cancer and climate change .
Other observers are sci-fi-like prognosticators, worrying AI will be so powerful it will trigger the demise of humanity.
Though much of AI's future is uncertain, Cohere is likely to be one of the companies at the centre of it - and Frosst doesn't take that responsibility lightly.
"It means staying grounded in what the technology can do today and what we think it will do in the future , but not getting lost in the distant sci-fi," he said.
Now boasting a valuation that surpassed $2.1 billion earlier this year, Cohere began as a startup in 2019 under Aidan Gomez, a Google Brain researcher, and Ivan Zhang, who had
dropped out of the University of Toronto to work at a genomics company but often interloped at Google.
Frosst, also a co-founder and former Google staffer, joined in 2020, followed by a rush of funding from technology luminaries Jeff Dean, Fei-Fei Li, Pieter Abbeel and Raquel Urtasun.
Though cloud-computing business Oracle, software company Blue Dot and note-taking app Notion made use of their LLMs, there wasn't widespread excitement around AI until
November 2022, when San Francisco-based OpenAI released a chatbot that can turn simple prompts into text within seconds. "That was a cool moment because ... we used to have a
lot of conversations where we would talk to people and they would say, 'what is an LLM?'" Frosst recalled.
"We don't have those conversations anymore."
But as people have learned more about the technology, many have let their minds run wild with possibilities, including the thought of AI developing superhuman intelligence.
"I think the conversation has shifted sufficiently to be distracting and it's ungrounded in the reality of the technology," Frosst said.
"That means that other conversations, like how this is going to affect the labour market or what this means for the infrastructure of the web, are difficult to have and that saddens me
sometimes."
Geoffrey Hinton, often called the godfather of AI and an early Cohere investor, has said he fears the technology could lead to bias and discrimination, joblessness, echo chambers, fake
news , battle robots and existential risk.
Hinton left his job at Google, where Frosst became his protégé, earlier this year so he can more freely discuss AI's dangers.
Frosst said the duo remain "quite close" but have an ongoing but "friendly disagreement" on whether AI poses an existential threat. (Frosst doesn't think it does.)
Hinton did not comment on his rapport with Frosst or support for Cohere.
But just because he disagrees with Hinton's take on existential threats, doesn't mean Frosst is naive to AI's risks.
Cohere was among a group of signatories, including BlackBerry Ltd., OpenText Corp. and Telus Corp., who agreed to a voluntary code of conduct the federal government released in
September. As part of the code, the company has promised to assess and mitigate the risks of their AI-based systems, monitor them for incidents and act on issues that develop.
Cohere also has an external advisory council designed to ensure what the company builds is deployed carefully and a safety team constantly thinking about how they can mitigate
anything that can go wrong.
"We work on trying to make sure that this tech is good at the things we would be proud of and bad at the things we wouldn't be," Frosst said.
The bad things form an expansive list in Cohere's terms of service, including the generation of political propaganda, cyberattacks designed to interfere with servers and networks, and
activities that cause serious personal injury, severe environmental or property damage or even death.
"Defamatory, bullying, harassing," behaviour as well as activities that promote violence, racism and hatred are also banned.
Cohere is constantly evaluating whether there are things worth adding to the list, but Frosst said there haven't been any major shifts in its approach over the past few years.
However, he's proud that even having a list may shape how people think about AI's ramifications.
"In general, I think it's great to have people think about the consequences of technology," Frosst said.
"I think people should always ... be thinking about how it could go wrong, and that's something we think about here all the time."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

121/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Canadian Press
Nick Frosst, co-founder of Cohere, says it's important to always be thinking about how could go wrong, but he say he's focused on what it can do today and is not "getting lost in the distant sci-fi." Chris
Young THE CANADIAN PRESS file photo
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240102ek120005t

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

122/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
3284 words
5 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce ( CM-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CM-T] ) were higher after it announced it is revamping its top
executive team [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-cibc-shuffles-executive-roles-splits-digital-banking-unit-as/] for the second time this year as a key lieutenant to chief
executive officer Victor Dodig steps back from day-to-day operations, further defining the roster of potential contenders to be the bank’s next CEO.
Jon Hountalas will become CIBC’s vice chair of North American banking, handing off his daily duties as group head of Canadian banking – a sprawling role in which he has overseen
retail and commercial banking as well as wealth management. A banking veteran with nearly 40 years of experience, he will stay on the bank’s Executive Committee, reporting to Mr.
Dodig.
Susan Rimmer will be named group head of commercial banking and wealth, joining the top executive team under Mr. Dodig after two years as global head of corporate and investment
banking. Harry Culham keeps his current job as head of capital markets and adds oversight of the bank’s asset management arm, which manages about $300-billion of assets and has
a mandate to get bigger. And Christian Exshaw, the bank’s head of global markets, will be named deputy head of capital markets, taking over the corporate and investment banking role
vacated by Ms. Rimmer.
“The logic is continual, natural evolution of strengthening our talent bench and making sure the best leaders are in the best jobs,” Mr. Dodig said in an interview. “Everybody gets a little
more to do or something new to do to drive the strategic agenda of the bank going forward.”
The changes take effect on Nov. 1, the start of CIBC’s next fiscal year. And they come as CIBC has performed well [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-cibc-reportssharp-spike-in-profit-on-revenue-growth-lower-loan-loss/] , with its share price up nearly 25 per cent since the start of 2024, and analysts praising the bank for its consistent
performance.
CIBC is also breaking up its Direct Financial Services (DFS) unit, an amalgamation of three digitally focused initiatives that was led by Mr. Exshaw. The bank’s low-cost Simplii
Financial subsidiary will report to Hratch Panossian, who has led personal and business banking since CIBC last shuffled its senior leaders in April
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-cibc-shakes-up-leadership-ahead-of-ceo-succession/] . The bank’s digital brokerage, Investor’s Edge, will report to Ms. Rimmer in
wealth management, while the unit focused on digital foreign exchange and payments – called the Alternative Solutions Group – will stay within capital markets.
- James Bradshaw
Calgary-based Secure Energy Services Inc. ( SES-T) [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SES-T/] rose after it announced its intention to change its name to
Secure Waste Infrastructure Corp. It will seek shareholder approval for the change at a special meeting of shareholders on Oct. 29 and expects adoption at the turn of the new year.
“The Secure brand has always embodied safety, reliability, and entrepreneurship,” said president and CEO Allen Gransch in a statement. “While these core values remain at the heart
of our company, our new name reflects the evolution of our business and strategic focus. Over the past five years, SECURE has transitioned from a full-service energy services
company to a specialized waste management and energy infrastructure provider. The name SECURE Waste Infrastructure Corp. better captures our core business activities, which are
centered on the processing, recovery, recycling, and disposal of diverse waste streams, and the efficient operation of our critical infrastructure network.”
Verizon ( VZ-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/VZ-N/] ) rose after it said on Thursday it would buy Frontier Communications ( FYBR-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/FYBR-Q/] ) in an all-cash deal worth US$20-billion, as the U.S. wireless carrier looks to expand its fiber network.
Verizon has offered US$38.50 per share, a premium of 37.3 per cent to Frontier’s closing price on Sept. 3, a day before reports of a potential acquisition emerged. As of June 30,
Frontier had a total debt of US$11.25-billion.
The acquisition, which is expected to close in about 18 months, will help Verizon better compete against AT&T and others by enabling it to deliver premium broadband services.
Frontier has 2.2 million fiber subscribers in 25 states, which will combine with Verizon’s roughly 7.4 million FiOS connections in nine states and Washington, D.C.
Verizon had in 2016 sold its TV and internet business in California, Texas, and Florida to Frontier in a US$10.54-billion deal. This included a portion of its FiOS fiber networks and
customers.
Verizon’s fiber network is now largely in the North East and mid-Atlantic regions, while Frontier’s coverage spans multiple states in the Mid West, Texas, California and others.
“The acquisition of Frontier is a strategic fit. It will build on Verizon’s two decades of leadership...and is an opportunity to become more competitive in more markets throughout the
U.S.,” Verizon CEO Hans Vestberg said.
Tesla ( TSLA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TSLA-Q/] ) shares gained on Thursday after the electric automaker stuck to its plans to roll out the Full SelfDriving (FSD) advanced driver assistance software in China and Europe pending approval from regulators in the regions.
This comes about a month ahead of the company’s unveiling of its robotaxi product, “Cybercab,” underpinned by the technology that helps drivers accelerate, brake and steer in cities
and highways with human supervision.
CEO Elon Musk said in July Tesla was likely to get regulatory approval for FSD in both the regions by the end of the year. The billionaire said on Thursday FSD could be launched in
right-hand drive markets in late first quarter or early in the April-June period.
Mr. Musk’s tendency to set aggressive deadlines has led to doubts among investors and analysts, especially after missing several optimistic targets for FSD, Semi and Cybertruck.
It also announced other features like Actually Smart Summon, FSD for the Cybertruck electric pick up truck this month and version 13 of the software requiring fewer interventions next
month.
Shanghai, which houses one of Tesla’s gigafactories, allowed 10 vehicles to carry out tests of FSD in June, paving the path for its roll out in China.
Brokerage Piper Sandler said while recent data from a community tracker on HW3 (hardware 3) FSD performance might worry some car owners, it is not a major concern for Tesla
investors.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

123/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Tesla’s stronger focus on products such as its humanoid robot, the robotaxi and FSD comes as EV sales continue to be under pressure from higher borrowing costs, consumer
concerns around fast-charging facilities and driving range on a single charge.
Wall Street remains cautious about companies developing self-driving technologies due to tough regulatory oversight. Investors, however, anticipate that a potential Trump
administration could expedite the regulatory process.
Jeep’s parent company Stellantis’ ( STLA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/STLA-N/] ) U.S.-listed shares saw gains after it said late Wednesday that it will
resume production at certain U.S. assembly plants after making “production adjustments” and will assess if further action is required.
The Wall Street Journal first reported that Stellantis had paused making its Jeep Wrangler and Grand Cherokee SUVs in the past week.
Stellantis said in an emailed statement to Reuters that it continues to take the necessary actions to improve operations in the U.S. market, including making production adjustments at
the Toledo North, Jefferson and Mack plants.
The production at these plants will resume on Thursday, it added.
On Tuesday, the automaker named Bob Broderdorf, who was its Ram brand operation’s senior vice president and head of sales operations at Dodge, as the head of Jeep North
America.
In July, the U.S. auto safety regulator opened a recall query into 94,275 Jeep Wrangler 4xe hybrid SUVs manufactured from 2021 through 2024.
U.S. Steel ( X-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/X-N/] ) was higher a day after reports that the White House was close to announcing that U.S. President
Joe Biden will block Nippon Steel’s US$15-billion acquisition bid on national security risks.
The deal is facing growing bipartisan political opposition amid upcoming presidential elections in the U.S., and a powerful labor union is against the takeover of Pennsylvaniaheadquartered U.S. Steel, a swing state key to both Democrats and Republicans.
Governments should not intervene in deals in an arbitrary manner as a matter of principle, Taro Kono, a Japanese minister and prime ministerial candidate, said when asked about
news that the U.S. is preparing to block the takeover.
“There are times when the free market is outweighed by national security, environment and labor rights issues, but I am not sure if the acquisition of U.S. Steel is comparable to that,”
Mr. Kono, Japan’s digital minister who is running in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) leadership election this month to replace Prime Minister Fumio Kishida, said on Thursday.
Buyouts can benefit companies and regions, he said. The LDP’s parliamentary control means its leader becomes the prime minister of Japan.
“Perhaps it is the presidential election and everyone wants the labor union vote, but I would hope that the market will not be distorted by such a situation.”
The deal, which both companies hope to close by the end of this year, is particularly sensitive as the U.S. is Japan’s closest ally and Japan, in turn, is the biggest foreign investor into
the U.S.
“The U.S.-Japan relationship is deeper, richer, and stronger than any single commercial transaction,” the U.S. Ambassador to Japan, Rahm Emanuel, told reporters separately on
Thursday.
Nippon Steel shares closed down 0.4 per cent in Tokyo after climbing on the news earlier in the day, still outperforming the wider Nikkei index which was down 1 per cent.
JetBlue Airways ( JBLU-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/JBLU-Q/] ) raised its third-quarter revenue forecast on Thursday, citing improved operational
performance and strong summer travel demand, sending its shares higher.
The airline said the improved outlook was due to stronger bookings in Latin America, one of its major markets, and on gains from previously announced cost cuts and canceling routes
that were less profitable.
Bookings from travelers, who were affected by the global cyber outage in July that forced multiple airlines to halt flights, also helped, the airline added.
JetBlue was not one of the primary carriers affected by that outage, which stranded thousands of passengers across the nation.
The carrier now expects revenue in the range of a 2.5-per-cent decline to 1-per-cent growth year-on-year in the July-September quarter. The company had earlier forecast revenue to
drop somewhere between 1.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent for the quarter.
Since the termination of its proposed US$3.8-billion merger with ultra-low-cost carrier Spirit Airlines in March, Jetblue has taken several measures to improve its financial performance.
It deferred deliveries of 44 new jets from Airbus, reducing planned capital expenditures by about $3 billion between 2025 and 2029. The company also decided to exit some routes that
were not living up to its financial expectations .
JetBlue now expects current quarter unit costs excluding fuel to grow between 5 per cent and 7 per cent, compared with a previous forecast for a 6-8-per-cent rise.
The airline also expects fuel costs to fall as jet fuel prices moderated in the quarter.
On the decline
Alimentation Couche-Tard ( ATD-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ATD-T/] ) was lower on reports Japanese retail giant Seven & i will inform it that its
takeover bid price is “inadequate.”
Seven & i will ask Couche-Tard to reconsider its takeover bid, also referring to competition law concerns mainly in the U.S., although the company does not reject the offer and will
continue to talk with the suitor, a source told Reuters.
The company’s board will send a letter to Couche-Tard as early as Friday, according to the Nikkei business daily, which reported the news first.
The Nikkei said Couche-Tard offered roughly 6 trillion yen (US$41.81-billion) when it made its proposal in July. News of Couche-Tard’s approach for the global operator of the 7-Eleven
convenience store chain, which would be the largest foreign takeover of a Japanese company, pushed Seven & i shares up almost 23% on Aug. 19.
Seven & i, with a market valuation of about 5.6 trillion yen ($39 billion), previously said it formed a special committee to review the proposal, whose value or terms have not been
disclosed.
On Wednesday, Couche-Tard’s departing chief executive officer Brian Hannasch said he is upbeat about future takeover opportunities
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/international-business/article-7-eleven-stores-operator-seven-i-to-ask-couche-tard-to-reconsider/] after the convenience store chain
announced the latest financial results, though it remains largely quiet on its potential blockbuster acquisition of 7-Eleven parent Seven & i Holdings Co., Ltd.
Mr. Hannasch did not refer directly to Seven & i, but did talk about the potential for consolidation in a U.S. market dominated by family-owned gas stations and corner stores. In a press
release, he highlighted Couche-Tard’s US$1.6-billion purchase of 270 stores under the GetGo Café + Market brand from supermarket chain Giant Eagle Inc., which was announced
last month.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

124/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Shares of Vancouver’s Canfor Corp. ( CFP-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CFP-T] ) fell after it announced it is shutting two northern British Columbia
sawmills in a move it says will affect about 500 workers, partly blaming “punitive” U.S. tariffs imposed last month.
It said in a statement Wednesday that shutting the Plateau mill in Vanderhoof and its Fort St. John operation would also remove 670 million board feet of annual production capacity.
The company blamed the closures on the challenge of accessing economically viable timber, as well as ongoing financial losses and weak lumber markets, but said the final blow was
the big increase in U.S. tariffs.
President and CEO Don Kayne said in a statement that Canfor’s B.C. operations had lost “hundreds of millions of dollars” in recent years, something he also connected to “increasing
regulatory complexity.”
But the company’s challenges were exacerbated by the “punitive U.S. tariffs” announced on Aug. 14, he said.
He said that delaying the closures of the Vanderhoof and Fort St. John mills would “prolong the punishing anti-dumping duties and put additional operations at risk.”
On Aug. 14, the U.S. nearly doubled duties on softwood lumber, in a move the Canadian government called unfair and unwarranted.
The duties increased from 8.05 per cent to 14.54 per cent.
Mr. Kayne said the wind down of operations at the mills was expected to be completed this year, calling it “an incredibly difficult decision.”
“We are devastated by the decline in our province’s foundational forest industry, and we recognize the impact these closures will have on our employees and their families, as well as
our First Nation partners, contractors, suppliers, communities and customers,” Mr. Kayne said.
McKesson Corp. ( MCK-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MCK-N/] ) dropped with the premarket announcement it is selling the Rexal pharmacy chain to
Canadian private equity firm Birch Hill Equity Partners [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-rexalls-us-owner-sells-pharmacy-chain-to-canadian-private-equity-firm/] .
Texas-based McKesson announced the deal on Thursday, which includes the brand’s brick-and-mortar pharmacies as well as the Well.ca [http://well.ca/] e-commerce site. Financial
terms of the deal were not disclosed.
The Globe and Mail first reported that McKesson, a distribution giant in the pharmaceutical industry, was seeking a buyer for Rexall earlier this year
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-rexalls-american-owner-puts-pharmacy-up-for-sale-as-it-rethinks/] .
McKesson began building its retail presence in Canada in 2008, when it bought 270 independently owned pharmacies in Quebec that operated under he Proxim and ProxiMed brands.
It then spent $920-million to acquire pharmacies operating under brands such as IDA and Guardian Drugs from the Katz Group Canada Ltd. in 2012. In 2016, McKesson bough Rexall
from the Katz Group for $2.9-billion.
Eight years later, McKesson is prioritizing investments in the oncology and biopharma services side of the business, which are growing, chief executive officer Brian Tyler said in a
statement on Thursday.
- Susan Krashinsky Robertson
Hewlett Packard Enterprise ( HPE-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/HPE-N/] ) raised its annual profit forecast on Wednesday, as demand for artificial
intelligence servers continues to pick up owing to higher investments in AI infrastructure by businesses.
However, shares of HPE fell. Michael Ashley Schulman, chief investment officer at Running Point Capital, attributed the share fall to a drop in quarterly revenue in the company’s data
analysis and traditional cloud segments.
The company leaving its full-year revenue forecast unchanged has also weighed on shares, he added, as expectations for AI-linked companies remain high.
HPE’s AI server business, however, continues to outperform as computers powered by Nvidia are capable of processing and executing complex commands quickly and efficiently,
making them attractive to tech firms investing in generative AI and machine learning .
HPE reported third-quarter server revenue of US$4.3-billion, a rise of 35 per cent from the prior year.
The company, however, does face tough competition from server makers like Dell Technologies, which raised its annual profit and revenue forecasts last month on the back of server
demand.
HPE raised its forecast for annual adjusted earnings per share to a range of US$1.92 and US$1.97, from US$1.85 and US$1.95.
For the fourth quarter, the company forecast revenue to be between US$8.1-billion and US$8.4-billion, while analysts were expecting US$8.18-billion.
The company said it expects fourth-quarter adjusted EPS of between 52 US cents to 57 US cents per share, compared with estimates of 55 cents, according to LSEG data.
Revenue for the quarter ended July 31 came in at US$7.71-billion, beating estimates of US$7.67-billion.
On an adjusted basis, the company earned 50 US cents per share, compared with estimates of 47 US cents.
Shares of C3.ai ( AI-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AI-N] ), which makes software for enterprise artificial intelligence , slumped on Thursday, as
subscription revenue was squeezed by slow conversions of pilot customers.
High interest rates and an uncertain economy have led to cautious spending by enterprises, which have kept a tight leash on costs.
The company reported subscription revenue of US$73.5-million for the first quarter, missing LSEG estimates of US$79.1-million.
For the company, subscription revenue is comprised primarily of software licenses, Software-as-a-Service offerings, pilots and trials of C3.ai applications or generative AI , and
consumption-based pricing for which revenue is recognized over time.
“C3.ai had weakness in subscription revenue which decreased by ~$6.5 million quarter-on-quarter compared with adding ~$9.5 million last quarter and ~$5 million in the same period
last year,” D.A. Davidson analysts wrote in a note.
Management said it continues to expect pressure on gross margins “due to higher mix of pilots, which carry a greater cost of revenue during the pilot phase of the customer life cycle.”
“We also expect short-term pressure on our operating margin due to additional investments we are making in our business, including in our salesforce, research and development, and
marketing spend,” finance chief Hitesh Lath said in a post-earnings call.
The company, whose shares more than doubled last year, is set to lose more than $600 million from its market valuation of US$2.97-billion, if losses hold.
For the reported quarter, the company posted total revenue of US$87.2-million, an increase of 21 per cent, beating estimates of US$86.9-million.
With files from staff and wires

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

125/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-thursday-september-5-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240905ek95001up

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

126/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

New iPhones, new U.S. election memes and a possible new age limit for social media; Plus, a look at AI’s failure to deliver its
drug discovery promises
Samantha Edwards
1173 words
13 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Welcome back to Lately, The Globe’s weekly tech newsletter. If you have feedback or just want to say hello to a real-life human, send me an e-mail.
[mailto:sedwards@globeandmail.com]
In this week’s issue:

🤖 Artificial intelligence takes over new iPhones
⛔ Australia plans to ban social media for 16 years and younger
🥥 How persuasive are memes actually in an election?
⏰ A (possible) way to actually curb your screen time
Coming soon to an iPhone near you: Apple Intelligence
It’s the beginning of a new era, said Apple chief executive Tim Cook as he flaunted the new artificial-intelligence -boosted iPhone 16. Apple Intelligence will include a slew of tools
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/technology/article-apple-to-unveil-iphone-16-lineup-with-devices-ai-features-in-focus/] : it will rewrite e-mail drafts to be friendlier or more
professional, clean up photos to remove unwanted objects (such as ex-boyfriends), and summarize group chats, e-mails or web pages, which as someone whose job entails putting a
lot of effort into writing, feels just a tiny bit scary. The new iPhone 16 and iPhone 16 Pro come out Sept. 20, but the Apple Intelligence features won’t be available until iOS 18.1 is
released in October. And only on iPhone 15 and iPhone 16, and other devices with M-series chips. And not yet in China, where Apple’s AI partner, OpenAI, has currently blocked
access to its ChatGPT .
AI hasn’t delivered a drug research revolution – yet
AI was supposed to revolutionize drug development, with machine learning primed to speed up the lengthy process and achieve breakthroughs beyond the capabilities of the human
mind. As reporters Joe Castaldo and Sean Silcoff write [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-artificial-intelligence-drug-research-hype/] , that hasn’t happened. After a
decade of hype and hubris, there are no drugs designed solely by AI in the market today, and companies that have used AI to assist with development have faced setbacks, such as
clinical trial failures. But recent advances in the field, including foundational models that are akin to ChatGPT for biology, could potentially be game- changers .
Sorry Australian tweens, you may be waiting a bit longer to go on TikTok
Australia wants to add another milestone to turning 16: going on social media. This week the federal government said it plans to set a minimum age limit to use platforms such as
TikTok, Instagram and Snapchat, which is likely to be between 14 and 16. Governments around the world have been increasingly concerned over the effects of social media on kids’
mental health, with some trying to block “for-you” algorithms, which recommend personalized content, and other addictive aspects of the apps
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-new-york-moves-to-limit-addictive-social-media-feeds-for-people-under/] , or requiring platforms to apply for a license
[https://www.reuters.com/technology/tech-giants-urge-malaysia-pause-plan-social-media-platform-licenses-2024-08-26/] . But digital rights advocates argue that age restrictions for
social media could actually cause more harm to kids [https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/australia-plans-minimum-age-social-media-use-rcna170357] , pushing them into even less
regulated online spaces. And, researchers have found that some platforms can have a good effect on teens: a study from the University of Amsterdam
[https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/qe9rn] found that Snapchat has a positive effect on friendships for 71 per cent of adolescents.
A new U.S. election meme is born
As soon as Donald Trump falsely claimed during the Sept. 10 presidential debate that Haitian migrants were eating dogs and cats in Springfield, Ohio, the memes erupted on X: GIFs of
the Simpsons’ family pets [https://twitter.com/PatrikSandberg/status/1833679693654245796] side-eyeing each other, the soundbite layered over the Peanuts theme song
[https://twitter.com/NoahGarfinkel/status/1833708370974695574] , a photo of Alf with a cat sandwich [https://twitter.com/jules_su/status/1833682211997946052] . Filled with quotable
one-liners and memorable split-screen images, presidential debates are a breeding ground for memes, which have the potential to affect the tenor of campaigns. It’s easy to dismiss
memes as internet noise, but the Harris campaign considers it serious business. The campaign posts memes daily on TikTok and has invested millions on social media ads. For the first
time, the Democratic National Convention invited content creators to the event, giving them free rein to film viral dances from the convention floor. As I wrote this week
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-for-kamala-harriss-campaign-internet-memes-are-serious-business-but/] though, memes may have helped the Harris campaign build
momentum, but the good vibes may not last.
What else we’re reading this week:
Google and Apple face billions in penalties after losing EU appeals [https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/10/technology/european-union-apple-google-antitrust.html] (New York Times)
The desperation of the Instagram photo dump [https://www.newyorker.com/culture/infinite-scroll/the-desperation-of-the-instagram-photo-dump?
utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email] (The New Yorker)
How the Magnetawan First Nation is tracking wildlife with camera traps [https://thenarwhal.ca/magnetewan-first-nation-wildlife-tracking/] (The Narwal)
Adult Money
Brick, US$49
If you are like me and blow through your self-imposed iPhone screen limits on the daily, your finger pressing “Remind Me in 15 minutes” with Olympic-worthy muscle memory, then
perhaps you could also benefit from something like Brick. [https://getbrick.app/] It’s an app-and-device combo that allows you to block certain apps on your iPhone – with tapping the
AirTag-sized device the only way to unblock them. For example, if you want to spend less time on social media while at work, you could block the apps and leave the Brick device at
home. The company recommends finding a space in your home where the device will spend most of its time, like on the fridge or where you put your keys. There are plenty of apps out
there that aim to limit screen time, such as Screen Zen [https://www.screenzen.co/] , but the physical aspect of Brick makes it feel like it’s just inconvenient enough to actually work.
Culture radar
Can this video game boost China’s cultural cachet?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

127/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Chinese-made video game Black Myth: Wukong sold more than 18 million copies worldwide in its first two weeks when it was released last month, and is the most-played game of
all time on Steam. Yet as the Globe’s Asia correspondent James Griffiths explains [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-is-smash-hit-video-game-black-myth-wukong-thefuture-of-chinese-soft/] , even before its rapid rise to the top, Wukong was dogged by controversy, and since its release it has been caught up in conversations about geopolitics and
censorship.
At the same time, the game is a win for China, which has long looked enviously at the cultural footprints of Japan and South Korea. Even better, it has none of the political
awkwardness of previous exports like The Three Body Problem – a Netflix series adapted from a trilogy of sci-fi novels set partly during the Cultural Revolution – or TikTok, attacked
by some in the West as a tool of Chinese surveillance. Most gamers, however, aren’t paying attention to Wukong in relation to soft power or geopolitics. They just see an actionadventure game that brings mainstream players into a whole new world.
Other tech and telecom news :
Google, Apple to pay billions in fines and back taxes after EU rejects final appeals [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/technology/article-google-loses-final-eu-court-appealagainst-24-billion-fine-in/]
Apple AirPods authorized to be used as hearing aids by U.S. FDA [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/technology/article-us-fda-authorizes-first-over-the-counter-hearing-aidsoftware-to-be/]
Business lobby group warns Ottawa’s digital services tax could ‘imperil’ trade talks [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/technology/article-business-lobby-group-warns-ottawasdigital-services-tax-could-imperil/]
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: New iPhones, new U.S. election memes and a possible new age limit for social media
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-new-iphones-new-us-election-memes-and-a-possible-new-age-limit-for/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240913ek9d001p5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

128/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

politics/federal

Ottawa's largest-ever financial commitment to artificial intelligence includes funds for development - and a promise to
improve the lives of younger Canadians
www.thestar.com
889 words
16 April 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

OTTAWA - The Liberal government's budget pledge to funnel $2.4 billion into artificial intelligence development was designed to send a message to the world: Canada may have the
brains to lead AI innovation, but it needs the infrastructure, too.
The package of measures, which was unveiled last week but laid out in more detail in Tuesday's budget, is largely aimed at boosting Canada's capacity to actually create and deploy
the rapidly evolving technology.
It's the largest financial commitment the country has ever dedicated to AI, a technology Canada is trying to pioneer, harness and regulate all at the same time.
That's despite the country possessing the least amount of physical infrastructure - equipment that includes the servers and computers necessary for training and creating AI systems of its G7 peers.
"It's kind of like, we have the best oil workers in the world and we've got all the natural resources, but we don't have the pipeline," a senior government official told the Star on the
condition they not be named.
Tuesday's budget heeded industry calls to rectify that state of affairs by earmarking $2 billion toward shoring up computing capacity for AI development. The money will flow over five
years, starting in 2024-25 to launch a short-term funding stream for researchers called the AI Compute Access Fund, along with the Canadian AI Sovereign Compute Strategy, which
will ensure infrastructure is owned by and located in Canada to reduce reliance on foreign systems at a time of geopolitical instability.
"Challenges accessing computing power slows down AI research and innovation, and also exposes Canadian firms to a reliance on privately owned computing, outside of Canada," the
document notes.
"This comes with dependencies and security risks."
Another $200 million will be doled out over the next five years to speed up how quickly AI can be used in sectors like agriculture, clean tech and health care. Toronto Metropolitan
University's policy institute, the Dais, last year found that Canada is falling behind on AI adoption, with only 3.7 per cent of Canadian businesses using the technology in their
businesses as of 2021.
Another $100 million has been earmarked over the same time period to help smaller businesses develop "AI solutions" in an attempt to boost Canada's slumping productivity.
But the government's belief that AI holds the key to streamlining workforce woes is also twinned to its belief that the technology would ultimately improve the lives of millennials and
Gen Z - a base the Liberals sought to woo in this year's budget.
Government sources told the Star the money isn't simply signalling that there are lucrative jobs in the industry, but is also aimed at deploying AI in areas frustrating to younger
Canadians, like using it to accelerate housing construction or reducing food costs by helping grocery giants cut down on food waste.
Only the smallest slice of the funding is set to go toward the government's legislative goal of regulating AI. The Liberals' proposed law, the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA),
outlines the creation of an AI and data commissioner, who would oversee how the legislation is enforced should it pass. This year's budget pledges just over $5 million in the next fiscal
year to set up that office: the first financial commitment to a piece of legislation grappling with safeguarding against the technology's more dangerous and unethical capabilities without
stifling innovation.
Indeed, not all of Ottawa's money is aimed at promoting the burgeoning technology. A bucket of $50 million has been set aside over five years to launch an AI safety institute, following
the United States and United Kingdom in protecting "against the risks of advanced or generative AI systems."
The scope and structure of the institute is not yet known, but its purpose, a government official said, is to focus on the more "unpredictable" consequences of the technology by
ensuring systems are properly tested before they are used.
The final tranche of federal dollars is slated to address another of the top concerns sparked by the rapidly expanding applications of AI: its potential to make many jobs obsolete.
The Liberal government's primary answer for keeping such a potential crisis at bay is to pump $50 million over four years into Ottawa's pre-existing Sectoral Workforce Solutions
Program to help industries at risk of disruption , which Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland has said includes everything from e-commerce to journalism . The money would go toward
leveraging the technology in those sectors in the immediate term, while Canada's legislative efforts would be focused on minimizing the scope of that disruption .
Karim Bardeesy, the executive director at the Dais, said it's not a red flag that Canada is pushing through large AI investments before a regulatory framework is in place.
"Some of the government's investments ... on the budgeting side are going to take years to roll through," Bardeesy said.
"Hopefully, they will have the (legislative) regime in place. But I don't think we have much choice to delay any further on the investments."
A man uses a computer keyboard in a photo illustration.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240416ek4g000rx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

129/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

business

How HP Canada is changing technology - and how tech is changing HP
Jared Lindzon
1573 words
22 June 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

Mary Ann Yule's first job after graduation was executive administrator for the president of a technology company. She loved it so much that she vowed to one day be in his chair.
That dream became reality in 2016, when Yule was hired as president and CEO of HP Canada - but it wasn't an easy journey. Along the way she had to go back to school, take on a
range of positions across the tech sector, and work her way up the corporate ladder while often being the only woman in the room.
In 2010, while serving as the vice-president of marketing for Toshiba, Yule earned an executive MBA at night from a joint program between the Schulich School of Business and the
Kellogg School of Management. In 2004, Yule was hired by CDW Canada to serve as director of marketing and procurement before being promoted to general manager in 2008.
"I've had a really good view of manufacturer, reseller, solution provider and distribution, to have an end-to-end view of how the business truly works, and where the places to add value
for all the various constituents are," she said.
It was while serving as general manager of an HP partner company that Yule found herself having conversations with the person who would eventually hire her, about HP's continuity
plans following the
then-president's upcoming retirement.
"The big Hewlett Packard company split into two - the biggest separation in the history of business - and HP Inc. was reinventing itself," Yule said. "They wanted to change the culture
to be more agile, to improve all our systems and tools and processes, to engage differently with clients, and the guy who hired me - Christoph Schell, who was president of HP for the
Americas - wanted me to bring positive disruptive change to HP Canada, and that spoke to me."
In the time since, however, Yule says much of the disruption has been external. Not only has technology advanced rapidly since she took the top job at the office equipment
behemoth, but the pandemic has completely changed how business tools are used.
The Star recently caught up with Yule at the company's Toronto headquarters to talk about her leadership philosophy, how the pandemic upended the office equipment industry, and the
future of work in the age of artificial intelligence . (I
previously wrote for
HP's Garage
as a freelance journalist , and my relationship with the publication ended in 2023.)
How did you get started in the tech industry?
Basically, I graduated from Ryerson and needed a job. I ended up getting a job in technology, which was exciting, but I just needed to support myself as an adult.
I started in the financial services technology sector as an executive administrator for the president, and that gave me an insight into how you run a company. I decided then that I really
wanted to be the president of some firm at some point in my career, and specifically in technology.
How did you ultimately achieve that dream?
I realized I couldn't become president as an executive administrator, so I took some extra courses at school at night and then moved into the company's marketing organization. Then I
did some work with them in New York City after they were acquired. I've been in tech ever since.
Prior to HP I ran a company called CDW Canada. I started as the leader for marketing and quickly my role expanded to running the show. When I was leading CDW Canada, CDW and
HP were each other's top partners, and I was having a meeting with the person who ended up hiring me about the continuity of care, because the president of HP Canada was retiring,
and the conversation quickly went from the continuity of our mutual businesses to, "Hey, this might be a really good opportunity for both of us," for me to join HP.
What have been some of the biggest changes since then?
A lot has happened in the last eight years. One of the most notable shifts was the pandemic. That required a different type of leadership than the one that came in to disrupt and
change and drive the business.
While I've always led with heart, the pandemic required a different cadence and a different care for employees. People want their employers to be empathetic, to see them as whole
people, and the pandemic was the catalyst for that. People were at home, struggling to manage all the different responsibilities they had with all the fear and safety concerns they had
at the time.
We do all-employee meetings regularly, and during one I opened up about my own vulnerability, about being home and not having people around me and always feeling on edge. I felt
isolated and I won't use the word "depressed" because I don't know that it was clinical, but I was feeling super blue. I was also reading stuff online about how everybody's doing all
these amazing things with the extra time, like learning a new language or how to play piano. I remember sharing this with employees openly, and just saying you don't need to do all
this stuff, just surviving was enough.
How did the pandemic change the landscape for business tools?
I was on vacation the week before the pandemic started, and I was getting calls from my chief of staff saying, the CEOs of some very major Canadian companies need to talk with you.
Everybody's saying, "we're an essential service, we need our people to do their jobs from home."
We had tremendous demand during the pandemic - customers were buying anything they could get their hands on - and I'm proud of how well our reseller community stepped up to
keep the Canadian economy running. Now we at HP think that hybrid is here to stay. In 2022 we acquired Poly, which provides the ability for people to have meeting equity regardless
of where they are.
We've always been a leader in security, but we needed to invest a lot more, because now lots of the malware and attacks come through the devices, the endpoint, so endpoint security
is now just as important as network security. We're making sure our technology evolves to the change that's happened in the world with remote work. On the hardware side, portability,

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

130/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

long battery life, those are all table stakes for PCs now, but security is the biggest one.
What role does artificial intelligence (AI) play in the workplace technology sector?
Well, you need a computer that can handle all that compute, whether it's in the cloud or on premises. We just launched a new class of next generation AI PCs, and the HP Z AI studio,
which gives you a workstation for AI development.
We've launched an AI master class so that our channel partners, their salespeople, their technical consultants, can learn more about AI so they're better equipped to have stronger
conversations with end customers about what AI is and what it means for them.
We also use AI to better our own environments. We've been using machine learning a long time, but now we're using AI to improve tasks, tools and processes in our own house.
In 2019 you told the Star that Canada was seriously lacking when it comes to tech R&D and investment. Has the situation gotten better or worse since then?
I think there's an opportunity for our founders and the brainiacs that come up with brilliant technology ideas to be enabled more effectively. It's the blood, sweat and tears of these
organizations and these people that do this, and they employ many people, and they grow into big, amazing organizations. We've got all the right stuff here; we just need to have a little
bit more policy, and money, for them to start and scale.
What do you think the workplace looks like in the short- to medium-term?
AI is going to change jobs, and we have a responsibility as employers to enable people. I find it strange that there's still leaders saying, "I don't know if I'm going to give AI to
everybody," because it's like saying, "I'm only going to give electricity to some of my employees." Most people are using it, whether you know it or not, so it behooves you as a company
to enable them.
Younger employees especially already know about all the cool tech that's out there - it's not like when I started working, where employers gave you exciting new tech you didn't have at
home they've got great stuff at home. You've got to make sure that their work is enabled similarly, and you need to train and upskill people around AI.
Jared Lindzon previously wrote for HP's Garage
as a freelance journalist . His relationship with the publication ended in 2023.
"I find it strange that there's still leaders saying, 'I don't know if I'm going to give AI to everybody,' because it's like saying, 'I'm only going to give electricity to some of my employees,' " says HP Canada
CEO and president Mary Ann Yule.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240622ek6m000ee

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

131/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

How HP Canada is tapping AI revolution
Jared Lindzon
1418 words
22 June 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

CORRECTION: Mary Ann Yule, the CEO of HP Canada, worked for Toshiba from 1999 to 2004 and was working for CDW Canada, not Toshiba, in 2010 when she began studying for
her executive MBA. Incorrect information was reported in a June 22 profile on her. (June 26, 2024, page B2)
Mary Ann Yule's first job after graduation was executive administrator for the president of a technology company. She loved it so much that she vowed to one day be in his chair.
That dream became reality in 2016, when Yule was hired as president and CEO of HP Canada - but it wasn't an easy journey. Along the way she had to go back to school, take on a
range of positions across the tech sector, and work her way up the corporate ladder while often being the only woman in the room.
In 2010, while serving as the vice-president of marketing for Toshiba, Yule earned an executive MBA at night from a joint program between the Schulich School of Business and the
Kellogg School of Management. In 2004, Yule was hired by CDW Canada to serve as director of marketing and procurement before being promoted to general manager in 2008.
"I've had a really good view of manufacturer, reseller, solution provider and distribution, to have an end-to-end view of how the business truly works, and where the places to add value
for all the various constituents are," she said.
It was while serving as general manager of an HP partner company that Yule found herself having conversations with the person who would eventually hire her about HP's continuity
plans following the then-president's upcoming retirement.
"The big Hewlett Packard company split into two - the biggest separation in the history of business - and HP Inc. was reinventing itself," Yule said. "They wanted to change the culture
to be more agile, to improve all our systems and tools and processes, to engage differently with clients, and the guy who hired me - Christoph Schell, who was president of HP for the
Americas - wanted me to bring positive disruptive change to HP Canada, and that spoke to me."
The Star recently caught up with Yule at the company's Toronto headquarters to talk about her leadership philosophy, how the pandemic upended the office equipment industry, and the
future of work in the age of artificial intelligence . (I previously wrote for HP's Garage as a freelance journalist , and my relationship with the publication ended in 2023.)
How did you get started in the tech industry?
Basically, I graduated from Ryerson and needed a job. I ended up getting a job in technology, which was exciting, but I just needed to support myself as an adult.
I started in the financial services technology sector as an executive administrator for the president, and that gave me an insight into how you run a company. I decided then that I really
wanted to be the president of some firm at some point in my career, and specifically in technology.
How did you ultimately achieve that dream?
I realized I couldn't become president as an executive administrator, so I took some extra courses at school at night and then moved into the company's marketing organization. Then I
did some work with them in New York City after they were acquired. I've been in tech ever since.
What have been some of the biggest changes ?
A lot has happened in the last eight years. One of the most notable shifts was the pandemic. That required a different type of leadership than the one that came in to disrupt and
change and drive the business.
While I've always led with heart, the pandemic required a different cadence and a different care for employees. People want their employers to be empathetic, to see them as whole
people, and the pandemic was the catalyst for that. People were at home, struggling to manage all the different responsibilities they had with all the fear and safety concerns they had
at the time.
We do all-employee meetings regularly, and during one I opened up about my own vulnerability, about being home and not having people around me and always feeling on edge. I felt
isolated and I won't use the word "depressed" because I don't know that it was clinical, but I was feeling super blue. I was also reading stuff online about how everybody's doing all
these amazing things with the extra time, like learning a new language or how to play piano. I remember sharing this with employees openly, and just saying you don't need to do all
this stuff, just surviving was enough.
How did the pandemic change the landscape for business tools?
I was on vacation the week before the pandemic started, and I was getting calls from my chief of staff saying, the CEOs of some very major Canadian companies need to talk with you.
Everybody's saying, "we're an essential service, we need our people to do their jobs from home."
We had tremendous demand during the pandemic - customers were buying anything they could get their hands on - and I'm proud of how well our reseller community stepped up to
keep the Canadian economy running. Now we at HP think that hybrid is here to stay. In 2022 we acquired Poly, which provides the ability for people to have meeting equity regardless
of where they are.
We've always been a leader in security, but we needed to invest a lot more, because now lots of the malware and attacks come through the devices, the endpoint, so endpoint security
is now just as important as network security. We're making sure our technology evolves to the change that's happened in the world with remote work.
What role does artificial intelligence (AI) play in the workplace technology sector?
Well, you need a computer that can handle all that compute, whether it's in the cloud or on premises. We just launched a new class of next generation AI PCs, and the HP Z AI studio,
which gives you a workstation for AI development.
We've launched an AI master class so that our channel partners, their salespeople, their technical consultants, can learn more about AI so they're better equipped to have stronger
conversations with end customers about what AI is and what it means for them.
We also use AI to better our own environments. We've been using machine learning a long time, but now we're using AI to improve tasks, tools and processes in our own house.
In 2019 you told the Star that Canada was seriously lacking when it comes to tech R&D and investment. Has the situation gotten better or worse since then?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

132/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

I think there's an opportunity for our founders and the brainiacs that come up with brilliant technology ideas to be enabled more effectively. It's the blood, sweat and tears of these
organizations and these people that do this, and they employ many people, and they grow into big, amazing organizations. We've got all the right stuff here; we just need to have a little
bit more policy, and money, for them to start and scale.
What do you think the workplace looks like in the short- to medium-term?
AI is going to change jobs, and we have a responsibility as employers to enable people. I find it strange that there's still leaders saying, "I don't know if I'm going to give AI to
everybody," because it's like saying, "I'm only going to give electricity to some of my employees." Most people are using it, whether you know it or not, so it behooves you as a company
to enable them.
Younger employees especially already know about all the cool tech that's out there - it's not like when I started working, where employers gave you exciting new tech you didn't have at
home - they've got great stuff at home. You've got to make sure that their work is enabled similarly, and you need to train and upskill people around AI.
This interview has been edited and condensed.
Jared Lindzon previously wrote for HP's Garage as a freelance journalist . His relationship with the publication ended
in 2023.
"I find it strange that there's still leaders saying, 'I don't know if I'm going to give AI to everybody,' because it's like saying, 'I'm only going to give electricity to some of my employees,'" says HP Canada
CEO and president Mary Ann Yule. Nick Kozak for the Toronto Star
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240622ek6m0006h

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

133/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
2062 words
21 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Manulife Financial ( MFC-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MFC-T/] ) rose on news it will reinsure $5.4-billion of its reserves as it looks to
transfer some risk from its portfolio and free up capital for stock buybacks.
The agreement with Reinsurance Group of America covers $2.4-billion of long-term care reserves, Manulife said on Wednesday.
Long-term care insurance is considered a high-risk business as it involves coverage for people with chronic or disabling conditions who need constant care, typically found in
individuals over 65.
Insurers maintain reserves to pay out claims by policyholders. By reinsuring those reserves, they can transfer some of those obligations and unlock capital to underwrite additional
policies or return capital to shareholders.
Manulife said the latest deal will free up $800-million of capital for buybacks.
Earlier this year, it had clinched a reinsurance deal with RGA Life Reinsurance Company of Canada for $5.8-billion of reserves.
Nvidia ( NVDA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NVDA-Q/] ) forecast its slowest revenue growth in seven quarters on Wednesday, with the artificial
intelligence chipmaker failing to meet lofty expectations of some investors who have made it the world’s most valuable firm.
Shares of the Santa Clara, California-based company fell 5 per cent after it posted results but quickly pared losses and opened higher on Thursday.
Expectations ran high ahead of the results, with Nvidia shares up more than 20 per cent over the last two months and hitting an intraday record high on Monday. The stock has nearly
tripled so far this year and is up more than ninefold over the last two years, giving it a market value of US$3.6-trillion. Nvidia is in the middle of launching its powerful Blackwell family of
AI chips, which will weigh on the company’s gross margins initially but improve over time.
The new line of processors has been embraced by Nvidia’s customers and the company will exceed its initial projections of several billion dollars in sales of the processors in the fourth
quarter, Chief Financial Officer Colette Kress told analysts on a conference call on Wednesday. Asked about media reports that a flagship liquid-cooled server containing 72 of the new
chips was experiencing overheating issues during initial testing, CEO Jensen Huang said there are no issues and customers such as Microsoft, Oracle and CoreWeave are
implementing the systems.
“There are no issues with our Grace Blackwell liquid-cooled systems,”Mr. Huang told Reuters. “The engineering is not easy at all, because what we’re doing is hard, but we’re in good
shape.”
Initially its Blackwell family of chips will carry gross margins in the low 70-per-cent range, but will increase to the mid-70-per-cent range when production ramps up, Kress said.
The company forecast revenue of US$37.5-billion, plus or minus 2 per cent for the fourth quarter, compared with analysts’ average estimate of US$37.09-billion according to data
compiled by LSEG.
While still a stunning rate of growth thanks to huge demand for the company’s chips that make up the brains of complex generative AI systems, it marks a clear slowdown from
previous quarters when Nvidia mostly posted sales that at least doubled.
Nvidia’s fourth-quarter forecast indicated the company’s revenue growth will slow to roughly 69.5 per cent from 94 per cent in the third-quarter.
“Investors have become accustomed to huge beats from this company, but doing that is getting harder and harder,” said Ryan Detrick, chief market strategist at Carson Group. “This
was still a very solid report, but the truth is when the bar is this high it makes things just that much tougher.” The slowdown in revenue growth, however, obfuscates enormous demand
for the company’s AI chips, which dominate the market.
Data analytics provider Snowflake ( SNOW-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SNOW-N/] ) on Wednesday raised its annual product revenue forecast and
said it has teamed up with AI firm Anthropic to build up its cloud services, sending its shares surging.
Snowflake’s data cloud has been seeing strong adoption from enterprises looking to use artificial intelligence -powered services to organize swathes of data.
Like other tech firms such as Salesforce ( CRM-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CRM-N/] ) and Microsoft ( MSFT-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q] ), Snowflake is also developing AI agents using its Snowflake Intelligence platform. Autonomous agents are
considered to be the evolution of a copilot, which can perform routine tasks on behalf of a person.
The company’s multi-year partnership with Anthropic would allow its customers to use the AI firm’s large language models to develop and enhance their own AI applications.
With Anthropic’s technology, Snowflake’s AI agents will be able to deeply analyze data and generate visualizations, among other functions.
“Our partnership with Snowflake enables enterprises of any size and industry to access our most advanced models within their secure data environment,” said Michael Gerstenhaber,
vice-president of product at Anthropic.
Analysts have also been watching how Snowflake’s new CEO can pivot it into an AI software firm that can leverage the booming technology amid stiff competition.
Snowflake expects product revenue of US$3.43-billion for 2025, compared with its previous forecast of US$3.36-billion.
The company forecast its fourth-quarter product revenue to be between US$906-million and US$911-million, above analysts’ estimate of US$884.5-million, according to data compiled
by LSEG.
Total revenue for the third quarter was US$942.1-million, surpassing estimates of US$897-million. Quarterly product revenue of US$900.3-million also beat expectations .
On an adjusted basis, the company earned 20 US cents per share, compared with the estimates of 15 US cents.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

134/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Deere & Co. ( DE-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/DE-N/] ) increased even though it forecast lower-than-expected 2025 profit on Thursday, as slumping
farm incomes and inflationary pressures affect demand for the company’s tractors and other agricultural equipment.
A decline in farm incomes, high interest rates and an uncertain economy have compelled farmers to reassess large expenses on agricultural machinery and forced dealers to limit
inventory restocking.
U.S. farm income is expected to fall for a second consecutive year in 2024, as farmers grapple with corn and soybean prices hovering near four-year lows.
“Amid significant market challenges this year, we proactively adjusted our business operations to better align with the current environment,” CEO John May said.
For 2025, Deere expects net sales to fall about 10 per cent to 15 per cent across all its machinery segments.
A slump in equipment volumes has also forced smaller rivals CNH Industrial and AGCO to trim their profit expectations for the rest of 2024.
The world’s largest farm-equipment maker expects profit for fiscal year 2025 in the range of US$5-billion to US$5.5-billion, compared with analysts’ average estimate of US$5.93-billion,
according to data compiled by LSEG.
Concerns around supply chains and a surge in demand led dealers to significantly increase their inventories last year, boosting sales for Deere.
However, amid the recent demand slowdown, skeptical dealers have slowed inventory restocking.
“As expected, farmers are pulling back on equipment purchases, given the growing P&L pressure, and that is reflected in Deere’s results and guidance for 2025,” said Chad Dillard,
senior analyst at Bernstein.
“It is encouraging Deere is managing channel inventories and defending price.”
The company reported a profit of US$4.55 per share for the fourth quarter ended Oct. 27, above Wall Street expectations of US$3.87, aided by lower production expenses and cost
controls, sending its shares up.
Alibaba Group ( BABA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BABA-N/] ) was up after saying in a stock exchange filing it will integrate its domestic Chinese and
international e-commerce platforms into a single business unit run by one leader for the first time.
The Alibaba E-commerce Business Group, as the unit will be called, brings together the Taobao and Tmall Group and the Alibaba International Digital Commerce (AIDC) Group.
AIDC groups cross-border player AliExpress, wholesale B2B site Alibaba.com, sourcing platform 1688 and secondhand goods platform Xianyu.
Its chief, Jiang Fan, a former head of Tmall demoted in 2020 after an online scandal, has been tapped to lead the new unit, reporting to Alibaba Group Chief Executive Eddie Wu.
Alibaba split into six business units in 2023, in the biggest revamp of its 24-year history. Prior to this latest amalgamation of two of those groups, Group CEO Wu had also been CEO of
the Taobao and Tmall Group and Alibaba’s cloud division.
Alibaba’s e-commerce platforms have been under pressure both at home and abroad as aggressive new players such as PDD Holdings’ Chinese platform Pinduoduo and international
site Temu, along with ByteDance’s domestic Chinese Douyin and international TikTok, gain market share selling low-cost goods.
On the decline
Palo Alto Networks ( PANW-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PANW-Q] ) beat Wall Street expectations for first-quarter revenue and profit on
Wednesday, owing to healthy spending for its cybersecurity services amid a rise in digital threats.
However, shares of the Santa Clara, California-based company fell. Palo Alto forecast second quarter as well as annual revenue largely in line with analysts’ expectations .
The company also announced a two-for-one stock split of its outstanding shares of common stock. Trading on a split-adjusted basis is expected to begin on Dec. 16.
Palo Alto raised its fiscal 2025 revenue outlook to between US$9.12-billion and US$9.17-billion, while analysts expected US$9.13-billion, as per data compiled by LSEG.
A rise in cyber crimes and hacks has spurred companies to invest heavily into cybersecurity, benefiting large firms that provide a wide range of security services, such as Palo Alto.
The company has been attempting to get its clients to adopt a new “platformization” approach to security by consolidating individual tools into one platform and simplifying
management.
“Our platformization progress continued in Q1, driving strong financial results,” said Dipak Golechha, Palo Alto’s finance chief.
Palo Alto reported revenue of US$2.14-billion for the first quarter, beating estimates of US$2.12-billion.
On an adjusted basis, the company earned US$1.56 per share, compared with estimates of US$1.48 apiece.
It forecast second-quarter revenue between US$2.22-billion and US$2.25-billion, compared with estimates of $2.23 billion.
The company also raised its forecast for adjusted net income per share to a range of US$6.26 to US$6.39 per share, from US$6.18 to US$6.31 per share it expected earlier.
Discount e-commerce player PDD Holdings ( PDD-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PDD-Q] ) fell short of market estimates for third-quarter revenue and
profit on Thursday, as its low prices did not persuade cost-conscious consumers to spend as much as expected on its platforms.
U.S.-listed shares of PDD, which runs the Pinduoduo online shopping site in China and Temu internationally, were down in Thursday trading.
Higher unemployment among Chinese youth and a property sector crisis have taken a toll on consumer confidence, holding back sales at Pinduoduo.
Competitors in China, Alibaba ( BABA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BABA-N] ) and JD.com ( JD-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/JD-Q/] ), also reported tepid sales growth for their September quarters.
While Pinduoduo has benefited from its low-cost focus, competitive pressure has been increasing with rivals ramping up promotions and discounts, sparking a price war.
“Our topline growth further moderated quarter-on-quarter amid intensified competition and ongoing external challenges,” said Jun Liu, VP of Finance at PDD.
PDD’s revenue jumped 44 per cent to 99.35 billion yuan (US$13.72-billion) for the three months ended Sept. 30. That compared with the 102.65 billion yuan average of 17 analyst
estimates compiled by LSEG.
Net income rose to 24.98 billion yuan from 15.54 billion yuan in the same period a year earlier, but the firm reported an adjusted profit of 18.59 yuan per American Depository Share,
missing estimates of 19.79 yuan.
With files from staff and wires

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

135/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Thursday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-thursday-november-21-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241121ekbl002p9

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

136/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

business

Vice, Bell Media, CBC: Here's a look at recent media layoffs in Canada
www.thestar.com
967 words
26 February 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

It's been a tumultuous year for journalism
in Canada and the U.S.
After massive layoffs at Bell and CBC, Vice Media announced last week that it would also be laying off hundreds of its employees, joining other media companies in the U.S. that have
recently cut jobs, including the Los Angeles Times and Washington Post.
Here's a look at recent media layoffs that impact Canadians.
Vice lays off hundreds of employees
Vice Media, the Montreal-founded online media company, said last week it plans to lay off hundreds of employees and shut down the Vice.com website.
The company filed for bankruptcy last May after a separate round of layoffs impacted more than 100 people.
Vice was then sold to a consortium led by the Fortress Investment Group for $350 million (U.S.), a far cry from the company's nearly $6 billion valuation in 2017.
Xtra Magazine hit by cuts
Last week, Pink Triangle Press laid off more than a dozen employees, including "several key members" from the staff of Xtra Magazine, according to senior editor of audience
engagement Mel Woods who
posted on X
Monday.
The Canadian-based online publication covers LGBTQ culture, politics and health.
The layoffs come as Meta
continues to block access to news in Canada
in response to the Online News Act. Last year,
publishers warned
the move could devastate their businesses.
Bell has laid off more than 6,000 people in 9 months
Earlier this month, Bell Canada Enterprises (BCE) announced it would be laying off 4,800 employees across the country representing nine per cent of its workforce. The company said
less than 10 per cent of the cuts would come from Bell Media.
Bell has plans to sell 45 of its 103 radio stations and will end weekday noon newscasts on all CTV stations except in Toronto. It also announced cuts to weekend newscasts, evening
programs and BNN Bloomberg daytime programming.
Combined with a separate round of cuts in June 2023, Bell has laid off more than 6,000 employees in the last nine months.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called the most recent cuts a "garbage decision."
"We need those local voices, and over the past years, corporate Canada - and there are many culprits on this - have abdicated their responsibilities toward the communities that they
have always made very good profits off of," Trudeau said. "So yeah, I'm pretty pissed off."
At the time,
British Columbia Premier David Eby said Bell had bought up the stations "like corporate vampires" then "sucked the life out of them, laying off journalists ," saying the company had
overseen the
"encrapification" of local news .
CBC lays off 600 workers
In December, CBC said it would be cutting up to 10 per cent of its workforce to address a budget shortfall of $125 million.
That meant laying off around 600 employees, including around 250 each from CBC and Radio-Canada. The public broadcaster also said around 200 vacant job positions would stay
empty.
CBC faced criticism from Conservative Leader Pierre Poilievre when president Catherine Tait declined to rule out bonuses for executives in spite of the layoffs.
American media layoffs
In January, the Los Angeles Times said it plans to cut at least 115 jobs, or more than 20 per cent of its newsroom. It followed earlier cuts by the Washington Post, which offered buyouts
with the aim of reducing its staff by 240.
Also last month, the company that operates Sports Illustrated said it would be laying off the magazine's staff. Last year, the publisher fired its CEO over allegations it used artificial
intelligence to write stories.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

137/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Messenger, an online startup, closed its doors last month after less than a year of operation. Last year, BuzzFeed announced it was shuttering its news division, which employed
more than 100 journalists around the world.
Other major Canadian layoffs in 2024
BenchSci: The Toronto-based artificial intelligence startup let go of an unspecified number of workers in January because of "economic environment, operational efficiencies, and
adaptation to technological advancements, specifically generative AI ."
Enbridge: The Calgary-based pipeline giant announced plans to cut 650 positions over the course of February, citing "increasingly challenging" business conditions including higher
interest rates, economic uncertainty and the ripple effects of geopolitical developments.
Google: The tech giant kicked off the year by trimming its workforce, leaving hundreds of its staff without jobs. Dan Raile, a spokesperson for the Alphabet Workers Union Communication Workers of America union, said some of the departing staff were located in Canada.
Indigo Books & Music Inc.: The retailer laid off an unspecified number of staff in January as part of its ongoing efforts to streamline its operations following losses, a cyberattack and
leadership changes .
Mastermind Toys: The toy retailer, which recently changed ownership, terminated about 272 employees as Unity Acquisitions Inc. took over the company in January.
Rona Inc.: The Boucherville, Que., home improvement retailer announced plans to axe 300 jobs and close distribution centres in Terrebonne, Que., and Calgary in January as part of a
plan to adjust its operating model and eliminate inefficiencies.
Staples Canada: The office supplies retailer shared at the start of February confirmed that it had cut an unspecified number of workers at its head office as it restructures and
streamlines operations.
Wayfair: U.S. home goods retailer Wayfair says 50 workers in Ontario were part of a January layoff impacting 1,650 employees at the home goods company.
With files from The Canadian Press.
After layoffs at Bell and CBC, Vice Media announced last week that it would also be laying off hundreds of its employees. (From top to bottom: Tijana Martin/The Canadian Press, Eric Thayer/Getty
Images, Nick Lachance/Toronto Star)
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240226ek2q000gr

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

138/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

How advisors can introduce artificial intelligence into their practices; AI can enhance business processes to improve
productivity and do more with less
Jason Pereira
902 words
29 January 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Sign up for the Globe Advisor weekly newsletter for professional financial advisors on our sign-up page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/?
utm_source=Globe%20Advisor&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter&utm_content=2021-1217_7&utm_term=advisor_weekly_cross_promote_advisor_markets&cu_id=6SJND3YLRIZaO5PUPgekOHYjPo35ExpC#globe-advisor-newsletters] . Get exclusive investment industry
news and insights, the week’s top headlines, and what you and your clients need to know. For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
You would be hard-pressed to find a business use case for which artificial intelligence (AI) isn’t being applied currently. I have implemented and experimented with AI technology
that generates blog posts, creates presentation slide decks, generates custom stock images, summarizes contracts, replies to e-mails, corrects my grammar, makes podcasts and
creates videos. These general-use AI cases will become all the more ubiquitous over the coming year.
In addition, many advisor-specific AI products are on the market, including solutions for drafting meeting summaries, action plans and financial plans, choosing investments based on
live market data, portfolio rebalancing, conducting tax return optimization, various compliance functions and finding errors in documents such as wills. Not only is AI doing all these
things, but it’s also doing it faster and, in most cases, better than most humans can.
Just like before
We have seen technological revolutions come about before, generally resulting in a mass reallocation of labour resources within the economy. The advent of spreadsheet software put
thousands of people who worked on huge paper spreadsheets with calculators and pencils out of a job but led to more people moving into accountancy, consulting and analysis of
those numbers. Bank machines didn’t lead to fewer bank branches; they led to more branches with more diverse service offerings.
This concept is known as creative destruction and can be summed up as the phenomenon that while technology will reduce or eliminate the need for specific jobs, it also creates new
types of work that couldn’t have existed before the technology existed. Case in point: One of the fastest-growing technology jobs is “prompt engineer.” This job is simply a name for
someone who knows what to tell an AI to do to get it to do it. This job did not and could not have existed before ChatGPT existed.
That leads to the question of what financial services jobs are at risk of replacement in this new world. Between AI and various other automation technologies out there, repetitive and
data-intensive technologies are most at risk. Areas such as back-office processing, administration and compliance will likely see our industry’s most considerable reductions in the need
for human labour.
But what will the impact on advisors be? While there’s no one AI to replace us or our support staff functions entirely, there are countless ways to use AI to improve productivity. Like all
technology, leveraging current and future AI technologies properly will let us do more with less and faster.
The four choices
Just like in any other industry, advisors should consider these four possible choices for what they will choose to do in the face of this technological evolution.
1. Embrace
Use the improved efficiency to compete on price. An advisor charging 1 per cent today who can net the same profit at 0.75 per cent by implementing various AI solutions is at a distinct
advantage when competing for business and can use that advantage to grow versus their competition.
2. Expand
Increase the value proposition, expanding their costs simultaneously but still making the same profit due to the productivity gains. A business that does this has a distinct advantage
over competitors because it provides more value than businesses at the same and lower price levels.
3. Implement
Bring in these solutions, expand profit margins and change nothing. While attractive to many for short-term profitability, this is a long-term losing proposition as it leaves one at a
disadvantage to lower cost or higher service at the same price firms.
4. Ignore
Avoiding it simply leaves one with higher costs and lower profitability than its competitors. While not rationally desirable, momentum is a powerful force, and many will choose this route
and allow their enterprise value to decline over time.
The best option is also the trend
While the first option of price competition may seem attractive to many, it requires a huge scale to win. After all, if all that matters is price, you will have to be the biggest to win that
game. Just look at The Vanguard Group Inc. and BlackRock Inc. in the exchange-traded fund space.
Instead, the best option for advisors also happens to be the current long-term trend – expand. Provide more services and more value to a smaller number of households. Lean heavily
into the behavioural finance and behavioural therapy worlds to understand your client and their needs better and more deeply.
Although you can’t be all things to all people, you can be many invaluable things to some and AI can be a powerful tool for getting everything that isn’t focused on the client out of the
way.
Jason Pereira is a partner and senior financial consultant at Woodgate Financial Inc. in Toronto.
For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: How advisors can introduce artificial intelligence into their practices [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globeadvisor/advisor-practice/article-how-advisors-can-introduce-artificial-intelligence-into-their/]
The Globe and Mail

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

139/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240129ek1t000b5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

140/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

opinion/contributors

Bell is gutting Canadian journalism and handing a gift to the enemies of truth
Kevin Newman
723 words
22 March 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
Final
1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

As origin stories go, the one about the birth of "W5" is pretty great. It begins in 1966 with a fumble by a rival, a snatch, and a heroic run.
The CBC, in 1966, had just cancelled a groundbreaking and saucy weekly current affair show "This Hour Has Seven Days." It poked the powerful, bent traditional storytelling, and
earned plenty of enemies - too many for the management of CBC News at the time to withstand, so they canned it.
CTV National News was then in its infancy, and just as plucky. It saw the opportunity CBC had provided and launched a similar hard-nosed investigative show called "W5," even
though the privately-owned network was in desperate financial shape at the time, verging on bankruptcy.
Scrub through 58 more seasons of "W5," and you land on its final episode which airs this weekend. To its end as brash and brave and devoted to truth as in its earliest days, only now
with owners flush with cash.
Bell chose to cancel "W5" on the same day it increased its dividend to shareholders and its
executives
for the 16th straight year. The "W5" staff was dismissed or scattered as part of Bell's biggest layoff in 30 years, 4,800 people in all divisions.
None of it has helped the share price. It's still falling.
But the loss of "W5" and thousands of journalist 's jobs are only part of the story I think is worth telling because they are occurring at the precise time as the surging digital threat to the
safety and security of Canadians.
Let me explain.
Canada's security agencies have jointly warned "Cyber threat actors are attempting to influence Canadians, degrading trust in online spaces." The Canadian Security Agency warns
foreign powers " ... are increasingly using generative artificial intelligence (AI) to enhance online disinformation." NATO has given it the name "cognitive warfare." "More people are
unable to differentiate between legitimate and manipulated information" the alliance warned in April. Allies need to focus on "strengthening and defending the mind."
The number one anecdote to cognitive warfare, security experts agree, is robust verified journalism and fact checking. Yet Bell, the largest and most profitable media company in
Canada has chosen now to drastically shrink its division devoted to the pursuit of truth.
Look at the public record:
With the world rapidly destabilizing, Bell Media eliminated every international news bureau outside of North America.With climate change and cyberattacks contributing to more
community emergencies, Bell Media eliminated most local radio reporters.It's reduced the number of employees providing national news in every province outside of Ontario to ONE
person.Many of its local TV newsrooms are now deserted on weekends.And Bell Media continues to eliminate the most experienced reporters and anchors Canadians have learned to
trust.
All of these decisions risk making Canadians less able to combat cognitive warfare with verified facts and credible reporting. The agents of misinformation and manipulation face less
resistance - which reduces our country's resilience to this new form of hybrid warfare.
It is my opinion that the board and senior leadership at this highly profitable company, which was granted stewardship of Canada's No. 1 news source by federal regulators in 2011,
should acknowledge the current threat of psychological information warfare and reverse course. It should invest in its newsrooms, sustain "W5," and try some new bold ideas to fund
real journalism instead of relying solely on cuts after cuts to reward shareholders.
This is the time to fortify our information defences, not tear them down.
And Bell appears to know this.
It is promoting itself to business these days as a cybersecurity leader. "The threat landscape is changing" its ads say, "Bell has you covered."
But when it comes to the security of how we think, Bell is steadily capitulating. By eliminating in-depth investigative journalism ,
gutting international reporters,
and cutting local news and radio to the bone, Bell risks unwittingly aiding our adversaries in undermining our trust in truth, one another, and leaving our peaceful society more
vulnerable.
Retired and former 'W5' host Kevin Newman at a conference in Ottawa after addressing a parliamentary committee about the massive layoffs at Bell Media.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240322ek3m000jk

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

141/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Cohere CEO skeptical of an AI doomsday; Startup co-founder tells conference 'it's going to take us a while to exceed human
capabilities'
Tara Deschamps
651 words
19 June 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B1
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

The head of Canadian artificial intelligence darling Cohere says the technology is not bound to exceed human capabilities any time soon and if it does, he's skeptical any sci-fi like
scenarios will arise.
The prediction from Aidan Gomez came Tuesday at the Collision tech conference in Toronto, where the Cohere co-founder and chief executive spoke of how AI models are on track
to become smarter and even more capable.
However, he feels those advances have led to a "philosophical" divide among the industry, which has been rife with debate about where the technology is headed - and how fast.
"I'm of the opinion that it's going to take us a while to exceed human capabilities uniformly," Gomez said. The more gains the technology makes, the more likely it is to spark an
existential crisis, some, including AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton, have argued.
But Gomez, whose company has received funding from Hinton and whose co-founder Nick Frosst was one of Hinton's proteges, rebutted those views Tuesday.
Gomez described himself as "more skeptical about the bad, the doomsday scenarios and the fear mongering, the 'Terminator' style narratives" - a reference to the 1984 film, where a
cyborg assassin from the future targets a woman whose unborn son will lead the human resistance against a machine-led uprising.
"The notion that the technology is going to start self-improving, that it's going to start manipulating people, that it's going to take over, seize power and displace humans, that's a sci-fi
narrative and I am empathetic," Gomez said.
"But I just don't think it's true."
He also rejected the idea that the rise of AI will upend the job market, resulting in mass unemployment, but he conceded some sectors will see reductions.
"I'm a big believer in augmentation and not displacement, so I don't foresee people losing jobs," he said.
He explained that his view was shaped by the fact that many countries have low unemployment levels.
"We want to be doing more and we don't have the people to do it and so we need to make the people we do have much more productive," he said.
Gomez's remarks come as AI continues to be a hot topic with companies looking at how to better use the tool to bring efficiencies to their business and countries considering whether
the technology will have unintended consequences they must prepare for.
Many in the industry have predicted AI will create or exacerbate bias, discrimination, echo chambers, fake news , terrorism and security threats.
Gomez's opinions carry a lot of weight within the tech sector because he is best known for co-authoring a research paper at the age of 20 that delved into the then-novel concept of the
transformer - a facet of language processing that can identify relationships between sequential data like words in a sentence.
Later, he co-founded Cohere, which develops AI for enterprise use, meaning it helps businesses build powerful applications by using large language models (LLMs) - algorithms that
use massive data sets to recognize, translate, predict or generate text and other content.
The Toronto-based business's valuation surpassed $2.1 billion last year, making Gomez's talk one of the buzziest scheduled for Collision.
Also expected on stage this week are Hinton, tennis star Maria Sharapova and Indigenous rights advocate Autumn Peltier.
This year marks the final year the travelling conference that made its Toronto debut in 2019 will be hosted in the city.
Organizers have said the event will shift to Vancouver next year and be transformed into a North American iteration of the Web Summit conferences hosted in Portugal, Brazil and
Qatar.
The Canadian Press
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240619ek6j0009e

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

142/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both
directions
David Leeder
3354 words
31 January 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Canadian Pacific Kansas City Ltd. ( CP-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CP-T/] ) rose after saying it expects adjusted earnings per share to
grow by double digits this year, following a bump in revenue last quarter — and despite lower container volumes and a weaker grain harvest.
“Looking forward to 2024, we are confident that our unique synergy opportunities along with improving macroeconomic conditions can overcome a weak Canadian grain crop and
position us for another strong performance this year,” said CEO Keith Creel.
Smaller loads of wheat and other grains are expected to persist into the second half of 2024, the company said.
Containers remain another source of uncertainty, as consumers continue to reroute their spending toward services rather than goods in a reversal of pandemic trends. Pressure from
inflation and rising interest rates threaten to work as additional drags on product purchases.
CPKC said it saw lower domestic container volumes last quarter due to shrinking retail volumes, even as international container shipments rebounded along with a ramp-up in activity
at the Port of Vancouver after the 13-day strike in July.
The decrease was partially offset by a rise in refined fuel products and automotive shipments, as COVID-19-induced kinks in the manufacturing supply chain smoothed themselves out.
CPKC — the product of Canadian Pacific’s purchase of Kansas City Southern in April — said it boosted revenues four per cent to $3.78-billion last quarter from a combined revenue of
$3.64-billion a year earlier. Core adjusted combined income climbed three per cent to $1.10-billion last quarter from $1.07-billion a year earlier.
The US$31-billion deal — the continent’s first big rail merger in more than two decades — created the only railway stretching from Canada through to the U.S. and Mexico.
“This isn’t easy,” chief operating officer Mark Redd told analysts on a conference call, referring to the blending of two distinct rail networks. But he also stressed the potential efficiency
made possible by “synergies.”
Fourth-quarter core adjusted combined diluted earnings rose to $1.18 per share from $1.14 per share the previous year, CPKC said.
Net income fell 20 per cent year over year to $1.02-billion last quarter from $1.27-billion, it said. The figure doesn’t take into account Kansas City Southern profits from last year.
CPKC forecast that core adjusted combined diluted earnings per share will grow in the double digits this year from $3.84 per share in 2023.
Microsoft Corp. ( MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q/] ) beat market estimates for quarterly profit and revenue on Tuesday, as new artificialintelligence features helped attract customers to its Azure cloud service as they built out their own AI services.
Microsoft shares rose after sustaining premarket losses as investors absorbed news about rising costs to develop these AI features.
The company forecast operating expenses of US$15.8-billion to US$15.9-billion in the current quarter, up from US$15.4-billion in the previous one. It also said it expects capital
expenditures to “increase materially” on a sequential basis.
Microsoft, in collaboration with ChatGPT creator OpenAI, has pushed chatbots into its core products such as its Office software and Bing search engine over the past year, attracting
business customers eager to try the tech industry’s next breakthrough. Investor buzz over AI helped Microsoft’s shares rise by 57 per cent in 2023.
Total revenue grew 18 per cent to US$62-billion in the quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with the average analyst estimate of US$61.12-billion, according to LSEG data. Adjusted profit
of US$2.93 per share beat an average estimate of US$2.78 per share.
In a research note titled A Masterpiece Quarter and Guidance from Redmond Should be Hung in the Louvre, Wedbush analyst Dan Ives said: “Microsoft delivered its FY2Q24 results
that featured top and bottom-line beats as the company continues investing heavily into integrating AI into its overall portfolio to accelerate growth while focusing intently on bottom-line
expansion. This was another masterpiece quarter and guidance from Nadella that will send a major ripple impact across the tech world tomorrow as the AI Revolution is here.”
“We believe this is the start of a multi-year initiative aimed at generating significant AI use cases for customers across the enterprise landscape to gain further efficiencies while
accelerating profitable growth with Redmond leading the charge in this potential $1 trillion opportunity. We maintain our OUTPERFORM rating.”
Boeing Co. ( BA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BA-N] ) increased despite CEO Dave Calhoun saying it has “much to prove” to regain the confidence of
regulators and customers after a mid-air cabin-panel blowout of a 737 MAX aircraft, adding that the planemaker will “go slow” as it faces a “serious challenge.”
As expected, Mr. Calhoun did not offer a financial or delivery forecast for 2024, stating that the company must focus on delivering quality airplanes.
The planemaker, however, reported a smaller quarterly loss and better-than-expected revenue and free cash flow, though investors are more likely to focus on the company’s
expectations as it navigates the current crisis.
“We will not rush the system and we will take our time to do it right,” Mr. Calhoun said in a letter to employees, while voicing confidence in Boeing’s recovery.
The accident involving an Alaska Airlines-operated MAX 9 jet earlier this month has turned into a full-blown safety and reputational crisis for the iconic planemaker, potentially leading to
slower jet production and a loss of more narrowbody market share to Airbus.
Boeing said on Wednesday that 737 aircraft were being produced at a previously outlined rate of 38/month, a level that it plans to maintain after the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) barred the company from lifting production, while increasing its oversight.
The 787 production rate was at five per month, Boeing said, adding that it had also resumed 777X production during the fourth quarter.
For the fourth quarter, Boeing reported an adjusted per-share loss of 47 US cents, compared with analysts’ estimates of a loss of 78 US cents, as per LSEG data.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

143/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Revenue rose 10 per cent to US$22.02-billion, compared with expectations of about US$21.1-billion.
Starbucks Corp. ( SBUX-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SBUX-Q/] ) cut its annual sales forecast on Tuesday as the Israel-Hamas war hurt its Middle
East business, while warning that softer demand in January and slow recovery in China were likely to dent its second-quarter performance.
The world’s largest coffee chain also missed market expectations for first-quarter results, also due to slowing demand for its coffee and cold drinks in the United States.
Its shares, however, rose, as Wall Street analysts and investors were bracing for a bigger hit to sales following weak store traffic in November and December.
CEO Laxman Narasimhan said on a post-earnings call that the company saw a “significant impact on traffic and sales” in the Middle East due to the conflict.
Its impact also spilled into the U.S., he said, as some consumers launched protests and boycott campaigns asking the company to take a stance on the issue.
The company had in a 2023 statement on its website said it is a non-political organization and dismissed rumors that it had provided support to the Israeli government or army.
While Starbucks was working to mitigate headwinds in the U.S. through efforts including promotional offers, it would take time for its plans to materialize, the company executives said.
The company now expects full-year comparable sales - both globally and in the U.S. - to grow between 4 per cent and 6 per cent, down from its previous range of 5-per-cent to 7-percent growth.
While comparable sales in China rose 10 per cent in the quarter ended Dec. 31, improving from a 5-per-cent rise in the preceding quarter, Starbucks said the recovery was still slower
than its expectations as consumers turn more cautious in spending.
“Results were better than feared following the stock’s recent selloff ... it sounds like there is a clear plan despite top-line headwinds,” said Stephens analyst Joshua Long.
Walmart Inc. ( WMT-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/WMT-N/] ) rose after it said on Tuesday it will carry out a stock split of its outstanding shares at a
ratio of 3:1, as part of its ongoing review of optimal trading and spread levels.
The company said the stock split would increase the number of outstanding common stock to about 8.1 billion from about 2.7 billion.
The additional shares will be payable after market close on Feb. 23, Walmart said
Payments processor Mastercard ( MA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MA-N/] ) was up after it reported an 11-per-cent jump in fourth-quarter profit,
driven by resilient consumer spending during the holiday season as labour markets remained strong and fears of a recession eased.
The company reported a profit of US$2.8-billion, or US$2.97 per share, for the three months ended Dec. 31, compared with US$2.5-billion, or US$2.62 per share, a year earlier.
Growing expectations of a “soft landing” - where inflation cools without tipping the economy into a recession - has boosted consumer confidence.
Gross dollar volume, the dollar value of all transactions processed on Mastercard’s platform, climbed 10 per cent. Cross-border volume, a gauge of travel demand that tracks spending
on cards outside the country of their issue, jumped 18 per cent.
Net revenue rose 13% to $6.5 billion, Mastercard said.
Last week, Visa ( V-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/V-N/] ) also reported a better-than-expected quarterly profit, thanks to a strong holiday season.
U.S.-listed shares of GSK PLC ( GSK-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GSK-N/] ) saw gains as it beat market estimates for fourth-quarter results on
Wednesday, and unveiled an upbeat forecast for 2024 and beyond on the ramp-up of its vaccines and cancer drugs pipeline, underscoring the benefits of its consumer health unit spinoff.
This is the British drugmaker’s first annual earnings report after it spun off Haleon in July 2022. While GSK has been selling its stake, it still remains a top shareholder in the company
that owns Sensodyne toothpaste and other household brands.
CEO Emma Walmsley’s strategy has been centered around sharpening GSK’s focus on vaccines and infectious diseases, and shifting its HIV focus to long-acting treatment and
prevention therapies, amid a series of upcoming patent expiries and declining revenue from current bestsellers.
“We are now planning for at least 12 major launches from 2025, with new Vaccines and Specialty Medicines for infectious diseases, HIV, respiratory and oncology,” Walmsley said in a
statement.
The company is betting on Arexvy, its respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) for older adults, to be its next blockbuster medicine, as costly U.S. litigation over discontinued heartburn drug
Zantac looms and it recovers from a series of setbacks in its cancer portfolio.
Arexvy clocked sales of 1.24 billion pounds for the year ended Dec. 31, following a strong second-half launch that has trounced a shot from U.S. rival Pfizer.
GSK expects its adjusted profit per share to increase between 6 per cent and 9 per cent in 2024, on sales growth of 5-7 per cent, above analysts’ expectations for growth, according
to a company-supplied poll.
The company also expects sales and adjusted operating profit to grow more than 7 per cent and 11 per cent annually by 2026, compared with 5-per-cent and 10-per-cent forecast
earlier, respectively.
By 2031, GSK now expects to achieve sales of more than 38 billion pounds, 5 billion pounds ahead of what was estimated earlier.
Shares in the company are up nearly 9 per cent in the last 12 months, compared with a 1.5-per-cent dip in London’s blue-chip FTSE 100 index.
On the decline
Alphabet Corp. ( GOOGL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q/] ) disappointed Wall Street on Tuesday as holiday season advertising sales came
in below expectations and the company said its spending on data centers to support its artificial intelligence plans would jump this year.
Shares fell in Wednesday trade.
Alphabet has faced tough competition for ad budgets from other online platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, TikTok and Amazon., and economic signals in the U.S. have been
mixed.
Ad revenue in the fourth quarter was US$65.5-billion, up from US$59.0-billion in the year ago quarter but short of the average analyst expectation for US$66.1-billion, according to
LSEG data.
“Alphabet’s disappointing ad revenue numbers suggest that corporations worldwide are still uncertain about the pace of interest rate cuts from global central banks,” commented
Thomas Monteiro, senior analyst at Investing.com [http://investing.com/] .

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

144/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Google, inventor of foundational technology for today’s AI boom, also faces tough competition from the two players that have captured the business world’s attention, ChatGPT ’s
creator OpenAI and its financial backer Microsoft.
While Google’s cloud revenue growth slightly topped Wall Street targets, boosted by interest in AI, Microsoft’s Azure grew faster.
Rolling out AI and cloud services requires heavy investment in data centers and research. Capital expenditures shot up 45 per cent to US$11-billion, the highest in years, and Chief
Financial Officer Ruth Porat told analysts on a conference call that capex would be notably larger this year compared with 2023.
Overall revenue for the quarter ended Dec. 31 stood at US$86.3-billion, compared with estimates of US$85.3-billion, according to LSEG data.
Investors have grown more interested in the fortunes of Google Cloud. Last year the division earned its first-ever quarterly profit, but revenue growth slowed as customers streamlined
cloud spending.
CGI Inc. ( GIB.A-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GIB-A-T/] ) declined in the wake of reporting its first-quarter profit and revenue rose compared with a
year ago.
The Montreal-based business and technology consulting firm says it earned $389.8-million or $1.67 per diluted share for the quarter ended Dec. 31.
The result compared with a profit of $382.4-million or $1.60 per diluted share in the same quarter a year earlier.
CGI says it its profit excluding specific items amounted to $1.83 per diluted share, up from $1.66 per diluted share a year earlier.
Revenue for the three-month period totalled $3.60-billion, up from $3.45-billion a year earlier.
Excluding foreign currency variations, CGI says revenue grew by 1.5 per cent year-over-year.
In a research note, Desjardins Securities analyst Jerome Dubreuil said: “CGI’s 1Q FY24 results were broadly in line with our expectations , with a sequential decline in organic growth
but strong bookings and cash generation. Peers providing guidance for the year generally expect an improvement in organic growth later this year; CGI does not provide guidance, but
we also expect an improvement on the back of another quarter of strong bookings. The large buyback program renewal and strong cash generation should help the share price in light
of recent strong performance.”
Edmonton’s Aurora Cannabis Inc. ( ACB-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ACB-T/] ) rose on the announcement of a plan to consolidate its shares on a
one-for-10 basis.
The company says it expects the move will restore compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and ensure the company continues to have access to a wide range of institutional investors.
The plan, which is subject to regulatory and stock exchange approvals, is expected to be effective on or about Feb. 20.
Aurora shares closed down a penny at 53 cents in trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Tuesday.
The decision comes after the company consolidated its shares on a one-for-12 basis in 2020.
Aurora currently has 475,903,822 common shares outstanding.
High-flying semiconductor stocks slipped in trading before the bell on Wednesday after Advanced Micro Devices’ ( AMD-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMD-Q/] ) disappointing current-quarter revenue forecast added to investor worries over sluggish demand for non-AI chips.
AMD targets revenue of US$5.4-billion, plus or minus US$300-million for the first quarter, below analysts’ estimate of US$5.73-billion, according to LSEG data. That overshadowed the
company near doubling its AI processor projections to US$3.5-billion from US$2-billion.
After “ expectations for AMD (reached) a fever pitch in recent weeks and months.. resetting those expectations is not necessarily a bad thing,” said Bernstein analyst Stacy Rasgon.
That said, “the uber-bullish expectations for datacenter GPUs are probably out of reach at least in 2024.. making an expensive stock even more so.”
Shares of Santa Clara, California-based AMD dropped on Wednesday. They have climbed more than 137 per cent in the past 12 months.
Nvidia ( NVDA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NVDA-Q/] ), Micron Technology ( MU-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MUQ/] ), Qualcomm ( QCOM-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/QCOM-Q/] ), Broadcom ( AVGO-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AVGO-Q/] ) and Intel ( INTC-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/INTC-Q/] ) fell, while iShares
Semiconductor ETF ( SOXX-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SOXX-Q/] ) and VanEck Semiconductor ETF ( SMH-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/SMH-Q/] ) also sustained losses.
Shares of Tesla Inc. ( TSLA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TSLA-Q/] ) slid after a Delaware judge ruled Elon Musk is not entitled to a landmark
compensation package awarded by the company’s board of directors that is potentially worth more than US$55-billion.
The ruling by Chancellor Kathaleen St. Jude McCormick comes more than five years after a shareholder lawsuit targeted Tesla CEO Musk and directors of the company. They were
accused of breaching their duties to the maker of electric vehicles and solar panels, resulting in a waste of corporate assets and unjust enrichment for Musk.
The shareholder’s lawyers argued that the compensation package should be voided because it was dictated by Mr. Musk and was the product of sham negotiations with directors who
were not independent of him. They also said it was approved by shareholders who were given misleading and incomplete disclosures in a proxy statement.
Defence attorneys countered that the pay plan was fairly negotiated by a compensation committee whose members were independent, contained performance milestones so lofty that
they were ridiculed by some Wall Street investors, and blessed by a shareholder vote that was not even required under Delaware law. They also argued that Mr. Musk was not a
controlling shareholder because he owned less than one-third of the company at the time.
Electronic Arts Inc. ( EA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/EA-Q/] ) missed estimates for quarterly bookings on Tuesday, as lower spending and stiff
competition hurt demand for its gaming titles.
Shares of the company fell more on Wednesday.
Still-high interest rates causing gamers to tighten spending and stiff competition in the video game industry have hit the sales for EA’s gaming titles such as Star Wars Jedi: Survivor
during the holiday quarter.
Amid an uncertain economic outlook, video game publishers are competing for top spots with games such as Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3, published by Microsoft’s Activision
Blizzard, and Nintendo’s Super Mario Bros. Wonder dominating sales for the month of December, according to market research firm Circana.
Wedbush Securities analyst Michael Pachter attributes the results to the lack of big titles released in the December quarter and a tough comparison to the year earlier.
“They had to compare to last year’s (2022) launch of “Need for Speed,” and that creates a $150 million hole in the portfolio... I’d say this is what we should expect without any big new
games,” Mr. Pachter added.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

145/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

However, bookings for the company’s revamped soccer franchise, FC 24, grew 7 per cent year-over-year compared with the previous edition.
It reported adjusted profit of US$2.96 per share compared with estimates of US$2.93 per share.
The company also nudged up its annual profit forecast to US$4.21 to US$4.68 per share from its previous projection of US$4.10 and US$4.66.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-wednesday-jan-31-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240131ek1v001rx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

146/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

AI is no substitute for cyber experts
Jeff Schwartzentruber
735 words
14 September 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
B4
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

This is the year for artificial intelligence (AI) integration - it's now embedded in nearly everything we do. AI systems increasingly control our environment through IoT devices and
beyond. IoT devices connect our physical environments to the digital world, and more than 15 billion such devices are now connected worldwide. That number is expected to double by
2030.
We are also interacting ever more naturally with AI through chatbots.
As with any emerging technology, it started small: summarizing emails and writing limited responses, arguing with customer service chatbots for service changes and refunds, and
asking bots for travel recommendations. However, soon AI will extend to every aspect of our work and homes.
And there's much more in store. As the technology advances, its ability to predict and protect against new cyber threats will be vital for safeguarding and maintaining trust in our
interconnected world. AI also promises to improve communication and training within the cyber industry, simplifying complex technical concepts and making them more accessible to a
wider audience.
That's the good news . Now for the bad news .
AI systems will inevitably become targets for malicious actors. This is especially relevant to the next generation of systems, which have been shown to act in unexpected ways, such as
exposing private and sensitive information.
AI-driven security solutions also risk producing many false alarms, leading to unnecessary alerts that burden information security personnel or overlook genuine threats.
As AI evolves, it can potentially eliminate human technical expertise in cybersecurity. Yet balancing AI-driven automation and human oversight is crucial - an essential part of any robust
cyber operation.
The next significant boost in the AI revolution will happen when these systems, which are relatively isolated, group together in a larger intelligence: a vast network of power generation
and consumption with each building just a node, like an ant colony or a human army.
Future industrial-control systems will include traditional factory robots and AI systems to schedule their operation. They will automatically order supplies and co-ordinate final product
shipping.
They will call on humans to repair individual subsystems or do things that are too specialized for robots when needed.
But our newest robots will be very different from previous models. Their sensors and actuators will be distributed in the environment, and their processing will be dispersed. They'll be a
network that become robots only in the aggregate.
This will turn our notion of security on its head. If massive, decentralized AIs run everything, then who controls those AIs matters a lot.
It's as if all the executive assistants or lawyers in an industry worked for the same agency; an AI that is both trusted and trustworthy will become a critical requirement.
This future requires us to see ourselves less as individuals and more as parts of larger systems. It's AI as nature, as Gaia - everything is one system. It's a future more aligned with
the Buddhist philosophy of interconnectedness than Western ideas of individuality. (It also aligns with science-fiction dystopias, like Skynet from the Terminator movies.)
It will require rethinking many of our assumptions about governance and the economy. That won't happen soon, but in 2024, we will likely see the first steps along that path.
That's why the European Union's passing of the Artificial Intelligence Act in March of this year couldn't have come at a better time. This legislation bans high-risk AI applications,
such as certain biometric and facial recognition systems, social scoring mechanisms and AI designed for manipulation or exploitation. It imposes strict rules on high-risk AI systems in
critical domains, such as infrastructure, education, and employment, requiring risk assessment, transparency, and human oversight.
Despite criticism from the industry for potentially hampering innovation and competitiveness, and from advocacy groups for not fully addressing ethical concerns, the phased
implementation aims to balance regulation with practicality.
As innovators continues to propel the evolution of AI, many countries will remain significant contributors. But this evolution must be informed by policymakers and lawmakers who truly
understand the potential benefits, but also the very considerable risks.
Dr. Jeff Schwartzentruber is
a contributing author to CIGI,
a Senior Machine Learning
Scientist at eSentire, and a
Senior Advisor to Rogers
Cybersecure Catalyst at Toronto Metropolitan University, where he focuses on the intersection of AI and cybersecurity.
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240914ek9e0003q

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

147/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
3430 words
1 November 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Shares of Air Canada ( AC-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AC-T/] ) soared after it raised its annual core profit forecast on Friday, as the country’s largest
carrier benefits from strong demand for international travel and lower jet fuel prices.
Major North American carriers with international operations are cashing in on a booming demand for overseas travel and a resurgence in business bookings.
Air Canada is increasing its daily flights to China, while also adding capacity to other Asia Pacific routes.
The airline also announced the repurchase of up to 35.78 million shares, its first buyback authorization since the pandemic.
The repurchase aims to address the dilution that occurred due to its financing needs during the pandemic, it said.
Last month, Air Canada signed a new labour deal with its pilots, which would give the aviators a general four-year cumulative pay hike of about 42 per cent, generating about $1.9billion in additional value.
“The demand environment remains favourable. We have adjusted our full-year guidance and underlying assumptions to account for the evolution of the fuel price environment and for
certain contract-related adjustments,” CEO Michael Rousseau said.
The company lowered its expectation for average price of jet fuel to $1 per litre for 2024, from the previous estimate of $1.03.
The carrier now expects its 2024 adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of about $3.5-billion, compared with its previous forecast of $3.1-billion to $3.4billion.
Montreal-based Air Canada posted an adjusted profit of $2.57 per share in the third quarter, compared with analysts’ average estimate of $1.58, according to data compiled by LSEG.
It reported a quarterly operating revenue of $6.12-billion in the three months ended Sept. 30, down 3.8 per cent over the year earlier, but beat analysts’ expectations of $6.06-billion.
In a research note, Citi analyst Stephen Trent called the results “robust” and said: “Air Canada’s adjuste 3Q’24 EPS came in at $2.57, vs. Yahoo consensus of $1.58. Overall, the
results and guide looked very encouraging, with the quarter’s FCF generation of $282-milion up 109 per cent year-over-year, a full-year EBITDA guidance raise suggesting that our
bookaway fears on a possible pilots’ strike were overblown, along with the announcement of a share repurchase program exhibiting support for the stock. All else equal, these results
and guide could support Buy-rated Air Canada’s shares on Friday morning.”
Aurora, Ont.-based auto parts supplier Magna International ( MG-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MG-T/] ) jumped despite cutting its annual sales and
profit forecasts on Friday against the backdrop of the automobile industry grappling with weak demand.
Magna had benefited from a healthy flow of orders, with automakers ramping up production over the years, however, that pace has slowed as companies readjust their inventory levels
to match demand.
The company supplies parts and builds vehicles at its manufacturing unit for various automakers including BMW , Mazda and Ferrari.
Last month, auto industry consultants J.D. Power and GlobalData cut their expectations for 2024 global light-vehicle sales by 500,000 units to 88 million units.
Auto parts supplier Aptiv said on Thursday it took extra steps to boost profitability, after it cut its annual sales forecast. Peer BorgWarner also cut its annual sales expectations .
Magna now expects annual total sales between $42.2-billion and $43.2-billion, compared with its prior forecast range of $42.5-billion to $44.1-billion.
It forecast full-year adjusted profit of $1.45-billion to $1.55-billion, down from its previous expectation of $1.5-billion to $1.7-billion.
On an adjusted basis, Magna earned $1.28 per share in the third quarter, missing the average analyst estimate of $1.40, according to data compiled by LSEG.
The company reported sales of $10.28-billion, below expectations of $10.35-billion.
Imperial Oil ( IMO-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/IMO-T/] ) reported a third-quarter profit ahead of analysts’ estimates as higher production offset
weakness in its refining business, sending the company’s shares higher.
Integrated oil companies have been grappling with weakness in their refining segments on worries about weaker-than-expected oil demand from China, with companies such as BP
and TotalEnergies posting sharply lower quarterly results.
However in the United States, higher output countered weakness in the pricing environment as well as refining margins, with both Exxon, Imperial’s majority shareholder, and Chevron
reporting a profit beat earlier in the day.
In July, U.S. imports of crude oil from Canada jumped to their highest on record, data from the Energy Information Administration showed.
Imperial Oil’s overall production averaged 447,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) in the third quarter, up from 423,000 boepd, helped by higher output at the company’s Cold
Lake and Syncrude oil sands sites in Alberta.
Meanwhile, the company’s refinery throughput volumes fell to 389,000 barrels per day (bpd) from 416,000 bpd, reflecting the impact of turnaround activities at the Nanticoke and
Strathcona refineries.
The company’s refinery utilization in the third quarter fell to 90 per cent from 96 per cent.
Imperial Oil earned $2.33 per share, beating the average analyst estimate of $2.04, according to data compiled by LSEG.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

148/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Enbridge ( ENB-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ENB-T/] ) increased after it posted a more than twofold jump in its third-quarter profit on Friday, as it
benefited from incremental contributions from U.S. gas acquisitions, but narrowly missed estimates on higher financing costs related to the deals.
The Canadian pipeline operator had closed a $14-billion acquisition, including debt, of three Dominion Energy utilities — East Ohio Gas, Questar Gas and Public Service Co of North
Carolina — by the third quarter.
The deal, which made Enbridge the largest gas utility by volume in North America, had sparked investor concerns over its debt load on already-leveraged balance sheet.
Enbridge’s adjusted core profit from gas distribution and storage was up 92.6 per cent at $522-million in the quarter, helped by the acquisitions, which contributed $217-million.
Steady oil demand also boosted the company’s earnings, with its Mainline system transporting 2.96 million barrels per day in the quarter. Adjusted core profit of the pipeline network
rose 3.2 per cent to $1.35-billion, helped by higher tolls.
“In liquids, demand for the Mainline remains strong and our volumes for 2024 are expected to exceed 3 million barrels per day,” said CEO Greg Ebel.
Mainline is North America’s largest crude oil pipeline network. It transports light and heavy crude oil, natural gas liquids and refined products from Edmonton, Alberta to various markets
in Canada and the U.S. Midwest.
The company reported a profit of $1.29-billion for the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with $532-million a year earlier.
Its adjusted profit of 55 cents per share, however, missed analysts’ estimate by one cent, according to data compiled by LSEG.
Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q/] ) posted third-quarter profit and sales above Wall Street estimates, helped by favorable retail
sales, sending its shares up.
The company indicated it expected healthy results in the holiday quarter, its largest of the year, thanks to its faster shipping times and a move to stock lower-costs items.
Amazon’s upbeat results could signal a better-than-feared holiday season for retailers, who have been bracing for the slowest pace of holiday sales growth in six years.
Three months ago, Amazon executives warned that consumers were “cautious with their spending” and seeking less-expensive options.
Amazon reported a 7-per-cent improvement in retail sales in the quarter ended Sept. 30 to US$61.4-billion.
“The most notable item in Amazon’s earnings was the surprising improvement in margins,” said Gil Luria, head of technology research at D.A. Davidson. “Investors were concerned
about the ability of the retail business to maintain margins and Amazon was able to actually grow margins.”
The operating margin for Amazon’s international business jumped to 3.6 per cent in the third quarter from 0.9 per cent in the second quarter. The North America margin ticked up to 5.9
per cent from 5.6 per cent in the previous quarter.
The company faces heightened competition from discount retailers such as Shein and Temu, which sell a wide range of goods at bargain-basement prices sent directly from China.
Like its tech peers, Amazon said it expected higher capital expenditures for the foreseeable future to help develop artificial intelligence software. In a call with analysts, CEO Andy
Jassy called AI “maybe once-in-a-lifetime type of opportunity” and that “we’re aggressively pursuing it.”
Capital expenditures are expected to rise to around US$75-billion this year from US$48.4-billion last year. Mr. Jassy said Amazon expects that will grow next year.
Amazon Web Services, the company’s cloud business, reported a 19-per-cent increase in sales to US$27.5-billion, in line with estimates, according to LSEG data. It was the quickest
pace of growth in seven quarters for AWS, which accounts for a fifth of Amazon’s overall sales but roughly two-thirds of its revenue.
Net income was US$15.3-billion, up 55 per cent from 2023′s US$9.9-billion. Amazon reported earnings of US$1.43 per share, beating expectations of US$1.14 per share.
Intel’s ( INTC-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/INTC-Q/] ) gained after it expressed optimism on Thursday about the future of its PC and server
businesses, forecasting current-quarter revenue above estimates but warning that it had “a lot of work to do.”
The company has largely missed out on a boom in investments in speedy, advanced AI chips for data centers as businesses double down on adopting generative AI technology - a
market dominated by Nvidia, followed by rival AMD.
Intel reported third-quarter revenues above analysts’ estimates, but also posted a massive net loss as a result of impairment and restructuring charges.
In an interview with Reuters, Intel finance chief David Zinsner said the company was “making progress” on its profitability but that it had “a lot of work to do” to achieve the targets it had
set.
Intel reported a third-quarter net loss of US$16.6-billion, excluding losses attributable to certain non-controlling interests. That compared with a net profit attributable to Intel of about
US$300-million in the year-earlier period.
“Let’s be honest, expectations were quite low for the company and they beat those lowered expectations ” said Ryan Detrick, chief market strategist of Carson Group.
As one of the largest makers of PC chips, Intel has benefited as the rollout of on-device AI features and a fresh Windows update cycle renewed demand for PCs after a years-long
slump, helping the company surpass Wall Street’s low expectations .
Revenue in Intel’s Client Computing Group - which includes its PC chips for desktop and laptop computers - fell 7 per cent to US$7.3-billion. Analysts had estimated the client segment
would shrink to US$7.38-billion.
The company expects revenue of US$13.3-billion to US$14.3-billion for the current quarter, the midpoint of which is above analysts’ average estimate of US$13.66-billion, according to
data compiled by LSEG.
Analysts also expect demand for traditional server chips made by Intel - its mainstay data-center semiconductors - to pick up in the second half of 2024 after several quarters of soft
demand as investment is funneled to AI chips.
Boeing ( BA-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BA-N] ) was up on news that striking workers will vote on Monday on an improved contract offer that
includes a 38-per-cent pay rise over four years, a larger signing bonus and carries the endorsement of their union, which told members it had extracted all it could from the planemaker.
The latest offer, presented on Thursday, comes at a critical moment for Boeing, which this week announced it would raise up to US$24.3-billion to shore up its battered finances as a
seven-week strike by more than 33,000 U.S. West Coast factory workers worsens its cash burn.
“In every negotiation and strike, there is a point where we have extracted everything that we can in bargaining and by withholding our labor. We are at that point now and risk a
regressive or lesser offer in the future ,” the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAM) said.
Members rejected two earlier offers from Boeing.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

149/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Talks between the two sides were held this week with the assistance of Acting U.S. Secretary of Labor Julie Su, who praised the union and Boeing for their hard work in negotiating the
deal.
The union vote will come the day before the U.S. presidential poll, which is a dead heat between Democrat Kamala Harris, who would be expected to continue the Biden
administration’s pro-union policies, and Republican Donald Trump.
President Joe Biden congratulated the union and Boeing’s leadership on negotiating a new contract proposal, a White House spokesperson said, adding Mr. Biden “believes Machinists
at Boeing have sacrificed over the years and deserve a strong contract.”
Exxon Mobil ( XOM-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/XOM-N/] ) saw gains after it beat Wall Street’s third quarter profit estimate, boosted by strong oil
output in its first full quarter that includes volumes from U.S. shale producer Pioneer Natural Resources.
Oil industry earnings have been squeezed this year by slowing demand and weak margins on gasoline and diesel. But Exxon’s year-over-year profit fell 5 per cent, a much smaller drop
than at rivals BP and TotalEnergies, which posted sharply lower quarterly results.
The top U.S. oil producer reported income of US$8.61-billion, down from US$9.07-billion a year ago. Its US$1.92 per share profit topped Wall Street’s outlook of US$1.88 per share, on
higher oil and gas production and spending constraints.
“We had a number of production records” in the quarter, said finance chief Kathryn Mikells, citing an increase of about 25 per cent year-on-year in oil and gas output to 4.6 million
barrels per day.
Exxon earlier this month flagged operating profit had likely decreased, leading Wall Street analysts to shave their quarterly per share earnings outlook by nearly a dime.
The results included Exxon’s first full quarter of production following its acquisition in May of Pioneer Natural Resources.
The US$60-billion deal drove production in the top U.S. shale basin to nearly 1.4 million barrels per day of oil and gas, helping overcome a 17-per-cent decline in average oil prices in
the quarter ended Sept. 30.
The company expects full year output to average about 4.3 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd), including eight months of Pioneer’s contributions.
Exxon said it plans to issue a revised production forecast next month. The company noted that scheduled well maintenance will lower oil and gas output by about 30,000 boepd in the
fourth quarter.
The market is worried about oil supply outrunning demand next year, with exporter group OPEC reviewing plans to add 180,000 barrels per day (bpd) of additional oil supply from
December. Oil prices slumped over the summer and remain about 12% below June’s average.
Exxon disclosed it raised its quarterly dividend by 4 per cent after generating free cash flow of US$11.3-billion, well above analysts’ estimates. Rivals Saudi Aramco and Chevron have
had to borrow this year to cover shareholder returns after boosting dividends and buybacks to attract investors.
Chevron Corp. ( CVX-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CVX-N/] ) beat Wall Street estimates for third-quarter profit on Friday, helped by higher oil and gas
output, but its earnings fell from a year ago.
The U.S. company, whose proposed US$53-billion takeover of Hess has been delayed due to a challenge by rivals Exxon Mobil and CNOOC Ltd, reported an adjusted profit of
US$4.53-billion, compared to US$5.72-billion a year ago.
Shares rose in Friday trading.
Oil industry profits have sagged this year due to softer crude prices and weaker fuel demand growth. Oil futures in the quarter ended Sept. 30 averaged 17 per cent below the prior
quarter, and global fuel margins have suffered from slowing demand growth and excess supplies.
Chevron said it earned US$2.51 per share for the quarter on an adjusted basis, compared to analysts’ estimates of US$2.42 according to LSEG data, helped by a 7-per-cent year-overyear increase in oil and gas volumes and operating cost cuts. Year-ago adjusted profit was US$3.05 per share.
“We also are taking steps to optimize our portfolio and reduce operating costs to deliver superior long-term value to shareholders,” CEO Michael Wirth said in a statement.
Up to US$3-billion in cost savings are planned through 2026 from leveraging technology, asset sales and changing how and where work is performed, the company said.
Chevron has said it will move its headquarters to Texas from California, and open a new, nearly US$1-billion engineering centre in India
Savings are needed to boost returns. This year, share buybacks and dividends have outstripped earnings. The third quarter’s US$4.5-billion profit was less than the US$7.7-billion
spent on shareholder returns.
Pending sales of oil properties in Canada, Alaska and Congo will generate about US$8-billion in pre-tax proceeds. All three sales are expected to close this quarter, the company said.
Operating profits were down compared to a year ago in both its major units. Earnings from pumping oil and gas fell 20 per cent to US$4.59-billion while profit from refining oil into
gasoline and diesel tumbled 65 per cent, to US$595-million.
On the decline
Apple ( AAPL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AAPL-Q] ) AI-enhanced iPhone made a strong start, pushing quarterly sales ahead of Wall Street
expectations , but a modest revenue forecast raised questions about whether that momentum will hold over the holiday sales season.
A decline in China sales during the fourth quarter also concerned some analysts and investors, helping send shares down, despite surprisingly large overall profit and revenue in that
period.
Chief Financial Officer Luca Maestri told analysts during a conference call that Apple expects overall revenue to “grow low to mid single digits” during its fiscal first quarter, which ends
in December. Analysts had expected revenue growth of 6.65 per cent to US$127.53-billion during the quarter, according to LSEG data.
Apple did say it expects double-digit growth in its services business in its first quarter, leading some analysts to ask executives during a call if overall hardware revenue might decline.
Executives did not address that question, or give any indication of how the iPhone might fare, including in China, where Apple’s new AI features are not available. Apple has not said
when they will be available.
Prior to management’s call with analysts, Tom Forte, an analyst at Maxim Group, attributed Apple’s share drop to fourth-quarter China sales coming in below expectations .
“We see the potential for sustained weakness in China,” he said. Apple said overall fourth-quarter sales were US$94.93-billion, ahead of Wall Street targets of US$94.58-billion,
according to LSEG. Earnings of US$1.64 per share, excluding a massive one-time tax charge in the European Union, topped analyst expectations of US$1.60 per share.
Fourth-quarter sales of Apple’s iPhone, the company’s main product, were up 5.5 per cent to US$46.22-billion, compared with analyst estimates of US$45.47-billion. Other product lines
missed expectations .

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

150/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Apple’s fourth quarter ended Sept. 28, meaning it reflects only a few days of sales of its iPhone 16 series that went on sale Sept. 20. Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook told Reuters that
iPhone 16 sales grew faster than iPhone 15 sales did a year earlier, with both phones on sale for the same number of days in the fourth quarter.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-friday-november-1-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241101ekb1002gx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

151/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

THE GLOBE'S ANNUAL SCIENCE QUIZ
By IVAN SEMENIUK

1906 words
31 December 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
A8
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

In a year erupting with big developments in science, technology and medicine, how well can you separate breakthroughs from fake news ? Try our annual science quiz and be amazed
at the many things that humans witnessed and discovered in 2024
MATTER AND SPACE 1.
This year's astronomy story of the year was the total solar eclipse of April 8, which carved a path across central and eastern Canada that encompassed Niagara Falls, Montreal and
Fredericton among other municipalities. Which two western cities will be in darkness during Canada's next total eclipse of the sun in 2044?
a) Whitehorse and Yellowknife b) Vancouver and Victoria c) Calgary and Edmonton d) Regina and Winnipeg
2. This year saw the first soft landing of a commercial spacecraft on the moon. What Canadian-built equipment did Intuitive Machine's Odysseus lander carry to the lunar surface?
a) a drill b) a laser rangefinder c) a telescope d) a Zamboni
3. 2024 was a big year for the study of planets in distant solar systems with the James Webb Space Telescope. Astronomers often employ informal nicknames to draw attention to the
unusual characteristics of these planets. Which of the following is NOT the nickname of a world that was studied by the JWST this year?
a) The beaver planet b) The eyeball planet c) The popcorn planet d) The vodka planet
4. What precious metal did chemists at Western University use to tie what they described this year as the world's smallest knot?
a) gold b) hafnium c) platinum d) trifolium ANSWERS 1. c) Alberta's two largest cities are perfectly positioned for the Aug. 22, 2044, eclipse. Start planning. It will be here sooner than
you think! 2. c) The telescope, built by Ontario's Canadensys Aerospace Corp., was the first astronomical instrument to be flown to the moon's surface. Unfortunately, the lander tipped
over after it touched down, which left the telescope pointing at lunar dirt.
3. a) There are beaver moons but so far no beaver planets.
However, the eyeball planet (LHS 1140 b), popcorn planet (WASP-107 b) and vodka planet (TOI-270 d) were all subject to scrutiny by the JWST this year.
4. a) According to a description of the process published in Nature Communications, the trefoil-shaped knot was formed with a backbone of only 54 atoms, including six atoms of gold.
EARTH AND CLIMATE 5. Of the 28 Canadian volcanoes that geologists assessed this year, how many were found to pose a very high risk to people, aviation and infrastructure?
a) 0 b) 2 c) 14 d) 28 6. How much has climate change altered the summer shipping season in parts of the Northwest Passage, according to a Canadian-led study?
a) up to 14 weeks shorter b) no change c) up to 14 weeks longer d) up to 28 weeks longer 7. Which 2024 hurricane led to record-breaking floods in Quebec?
a) Hurricane Beryl b) Hurricane Debby b) Hurricane Helene c) Hurricane Lee 8. One of the factors that made this year's Jasper wildfire so devastating is the formation of a
pyrocumulonimbus cloud – a thunderstorm triggered by the heat of an intense fire that helps to promote its spread. Which country in the world has the highest occurrence of
pyrocumulonimbus events?
a) Australia b) Canada c) Russia d) U.S.A.
ANSWERS 5. b) Using internationally established criteria, the assessment, published in the Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, found that British Columbia's Mount Garibaldi and
Mount Meager are both very high-risk volcanoes, with four others falling in the high-to-moderate category. The assessment also noted that Canada “falls significantly short of
internationally recommended volcano monitoring guidelines for volcanoes of all threat levels."
6. a) Authors of the study, published last July in Communications Earth & Environment, say that the unexpected result has to do with the increase in mobility of sea ice from the Arctic
Ocean, which has been loosened by climate change and can now move into the Northwest Passage, blocking its narrowest points more readily than in the past.
7. b) While the 2024 hurricane season will long be remembered for Hurricane Helene's extraordinary devastation in North Carolina, Hurricane Debby's northward track ultimately made
it the costliest weather event in Quebec history. Both storms were sobering reminders that the effects of hurricanes can be felt far away from the coast.
8. b) Canada comes out on top in a regional breakdown of pyrocumulonimbus events. This means more Canadian wildfires could be amplified in ways that lead to fasterthan-expected
rates of spread.
ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 9. What children's book did scientists reference when describing a fossil tree they discovered in New Brunswick?
a) The Giving Tree b) The Lorax c) Winnie-the-Pooh d) The Wizard of Oz 10. What did Canadian researchers discover about Eastern garter snakes this year?
a) they can recognize themselves based on smell alone b) they prefer to hibernate in pesticide-contaminated soil c) they can survive immersion in water for up to one week d) all of the
above 11. What did Canadian researchers discover about bumblebees this year?
a) photos of them taken by volunteers have equalled scientific surveys b) they prefer to hibernate in pesticide-contaminated soil c) they can survive immersion in water for up to one
week d) all of the above 12. On what unlikely surface did a Canadian team report they saw mushrooms growing this year?
a) on a dead beaver b) on a live frog c) on a glacier d) on a loonie ANSWERS 9. b) In their description of the ancient plant with a straight woody stem topped by a thick tuft of frondlike
leaves, scientists saw something that resembled truffula trees from the Dr. Seuss classic.
10. a) Just as chimpanzees can recognize themselves visually in a mirror, a University of Waterloo study published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B found that Eastern garter
snakes possess self-recognition through smell.
11. d) In separate studies, researchers this year found that volunteer bee-watching can be a powerful data source, that hibernating queens prefer contaminated soil and that they can
also survive underwater for an inordinately long time.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

152/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

12. a) Mushrooms that grow on decaying flesh are a scientific rarity. But in 2024, scientists found mushrooms growing on a dead muskrat in a New Brunswick cave. They later brought
in a dead beaver carcass to see if they could reproduce the phenomenon, which they did. They have been visiting the dead beaver ever since to study the mushrooms, most recently
this past spring.
MIND AND BODY 13. Which non-human animal had its complete brain circuitry mapped this year?
a) beaver b) bumblebee c) fruit fly d) zebra fish 14. According to a genetic study published this year, what evolutionary change in our distant ancestors could explain why some people
are susceptible to the neurological condition known as spina bifida?
a) they acquired language b) they became mostly hairless c) they began throwing weapons d) they lost their tails 15. What did scientists discover about people who were infants in
Britain during a time of strict sugar rationing because of the Second World War?
a) they had a 35 per cent lower risk of diabetes b) they had a 35 per cent higher risk of diabetes c) they are less likely to drink tea than other Brits d) they are more likely to watch
Coronation Street than other Brits 16. What disease is prevented by the drug lenacapavir, hailed as one of this year's biggest scientific breakthroughs following successful clinical trial
results?
a) diabetes b) HIV c) obesity d) sickle cell disease ANSWERS 13. c) The landmark effort, known as the FlyWire project, is seen as a major stepping-stone on the way to understanding
brain architecture and function.
14. d) The study, published last February in Nature, found that a change in a gene called TBXT might account for how the common ancestor of the hominoids – our branch of the
primate family tree – lost its tail after splitting from old world monkeys some 25 million years ago.
Apparently, the change came at a price. Versions of the gene, which can affect spinal cord development, are also linked to an increased risk of spina bifida.
15. a) As documented in the journal Science, a team of U.S. and Canadian researchers looked at more than 60,000 individuals who experienced sugar rationing in utero through the
first 1,000 days of life. In addition to a reduced incidence of Type 2 diabetes, those individual were also 20 per cent less likely to develop high blood pressure. Researchers note that the
study points to the profound influence of early childhood nutrition on health outcomes later in life.
16. b) The drug, which is administered by injection twice per year, was found to have 100 per cent efficacy at preventing HIV in one clinical trial of adolescent girls and young women
and 99.9 per cent efficacy in a second trial involving subjects of diverse gender. As Science magazine reported when naming it the breakthrough of the year, the drug has the best
potential of any intervention to date of driving down global infection rates of HIV.
TECHNOLOGY AND CIVILIZATION 17. University of Toronto computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton was named a co-winner of the 2024 Nobel Prize for physics for his work on artificial
intelligence . What advance or aspect of AI is he most closely associated with?
a) AlphaGo (a game-playing algorithm) b) large language models c) neural networks d) self-driving cars 18. In July, workers joined the two sides of the Gordie Howe International
Bridge connecting Windsor, Ont., to Detroit. When was the last time a bridge was completed across the Detroit River?
a) 1929 b) 1949 c) 1969 d) this will be the first time 19. According to archeologists, what was the purpose of a six-centimetre-long hollowed out stone cylinder, up to 5,000 years old,
discovered in southeastern Iran?
a) lipstick b) pencil sharpener c) salt shaker d) whistle 20. What mathematical innovation was traced back to the 1440s by a Canadian scholar this year?
a) binary code b) decimal point c) negative numbers d) slide rule ANSWERS 17. c) Starting in the 1980s, Hinton's work on artificial neural networks – computer programs that can selfadjust to improve their performance – would prove crucial to the development of AI. Today, they empower every other application listed in this question.
18. a) Opened 95 years ago, the Ambassador Bridge, which sits just a few kilometres upstream of the new Gordie Howe bridge, is currently the busiest border crossing between
Canada and the United States.
19. a) In an analysis published in Scientific Reports in February, researchers found that the stone vial “contains a deep red cosmetic preparation that is likely a lip-colouring paint or
paste."
20. b) In an article published last March in the journal Historia Mathematica, Glen Van Brummelen of Trinity Western University in British Columbia, shows that the decimal point was
introduced by Giovanni Bianchini, an Italian astrologer, in the 1440s. The discovery pushes back the use of the decimal point by more than a century and suggests that the 15th century
was a more innovative time for mathematics than is widely supposed.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020241231ekcv0000q

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

153/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

AI-generated video has come a long way. Can you spot the difference between real and fake? Take our quiz
Joe Castaldo and Patrick Dell
2244 words
30 August 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

In the span of a few months, videos made with artificial intelligence applications have become viral memes [https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/03/yes-virginiathere-is-ai-joy-in-seeing-fake-will-smith-ravenously-eat-spaghetti/] , commercials [https://www-wsj-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/articles/all-ai-ad-from-toys-r-us-inspires-debate-overthe-future-of-marketing-fbecc05b] , short films [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oryIMNVtto] and music videos [https://www.stereogum.com/2262980/washed-out-responds-tobacklash-over-ai-music-video/news/] , marking an astounding – and unnerving – leap in quality.
Last year, AI-made videos looked like nightmarish acid trips with little attachment to reality. Today, the highest-quality content is much closer to depicting the way our world actually
looks and functions. The improvements in text-to-video AI applications have been fuelled by lots more data and computing processing power. Some developers, notably OpenAI and
Runway AI, are determined to make the quality even better.
The prospect of realistic AI-generated videos that can be made by anyone is only heightening concerns that nefarious actors will use the technology to deceive, defraud and mislead
the public.
To see just how far AI-made videos have come – and how far they still have to go – test your AI-detection skills with the quiz below.
Is this video AI-generated?
Kris Mina, a graphic designer in Burlington, Ont., isn’t sure what inspired him to type “Will Smith Eating Spaghetti” into a text-to-video generator called ModelScope in March, 2023.
He’d been experimenting with AI image and video models for a while and discovered that spaghetti was one of the easier concepts for these applications to mimic. As for why he opted
for Mr. Smith, he might have been influenced by the memes of the actor slapping Chris Rock at the Academy Awards ceremony in 2022.
In any event, the divinely inspired combination of Mr. Smith and pasta yielded something glorious and unhinged. The video he created and later posted to Reddit depicted an alien Will
Smith, his face a roiling claymation mask with weirdly spaced eyes and pinballing pupils, shovelling noodles into the stretchy, jelly-like maw of a masticating bloodworm.
“I was so surprised that I immediately shared the first 10 generated videos I got without cherry-picking,” Mr. Mina said. “I did not expect it to depict a bizarro Will Smith eating spaghetti
with his hands.”
The mix of comedy and horror in that video, paired with the novelty of AI, caused it to quickly spread across social media and eventually Mr. Smith himself. Earlier this year, the actor
posted a video to Instagram [https://www.instagram.com/p/C3i5vAZvRS3/] comparing Mr. Mina’s work to a (presumably) real video of himself gorging on spaghetti. It was captioned,
“This is getting out of hand!”
The spaghetti video is not a bad benchmark for progress. Compare Mr. Mina’s 2023 video with the one below, made in late June with Kling [https://klingai.com/] , a text-to-video
application developed by a Chinese company called Kuaishou.
Text-to-video generation has partly grown out of research into computer vision and robotics [https://news.berkeley.edu/2017/12/04/robots-see-into-their-future/] . One approach to video
generation involves teaching a model to predict what the next frame in a sequence will look like. That same ability can help a robot arm understand how to grab and move objects, or
help autonomous vehicles anticipate how cars and pedestrians will move a few seconds into the future .
Earlier AI models, such as one called VideoGPT developed by researchers at the University of California, Berkeley in 2021, had no text input at all. Instead, it produced a completely
random video or a continuation of a single frame.
But progress with large language models , such as the one behind ChatGPT , which can produce and analyze text, marked a leap forward for video, too. A deeper understanding of
language now allows an AI model to better interpret instructions and associate words with their visual representations. Researchers at Tsinghua University in Beijing were among the
first to seize on this potential and released what they said was “probably” the first large, open-source text-to-video model in 2022, which they called CogVideo.
The results resemble impressionist paintings come to life.
So how did AI-generated videos go from surrealist fever dreams to flawed but convincing simulations?
Beyond the technical ingenuity that goes into building AI models, there are two big factors. The first is data. Every AI model requires large volumes of information to decipher
connections and patterns. To render a squirrel, for example, a video generation model needs to see lots and lots of squirrels performing various actions from different angles. The
internet is drowning in video content, but to be most useful, the data has to be annotated with text descriptions so that an AI model can link words to images. CogVideo, for example,
was trained on 5.4 million video clips annotated with text descriptions.
Such datasets have not always been easy to come by, and they can be expensive and time-consuming to compile. Academic institutions and AI labs have nevertheless assembled
large publicly available video datasets for research purposes, particularly in the robotics and computer vision fields. Some have proven useful for text-to-video generation, too.
Is this video AI-generated?
Google DeepMind released multiple versions of a dataset called Kinetics that consists of links to hundreds of thousands of YouTube videos of humans performing various tasks. In a
way, it’s an attempt to capture a portion of the infinite range of the human experience, sliced into minute categories such as “headbutting,” “entering church,” and “eating nachos.”
Researchers at universities in France and the Czech Republic assembled HowTo100M, a dataset of 136 million YouTube video clips in 2019. The researchers found that instructional
videos – how to unclog a toilet, how to make a risotto, and so on – were bountiful on YouTube. Better yet, these videos contained narration, describing the actions in the videos in real
time. That proved to be a ripe source of AI training data.
Is this video AI-generated?
Because data is so crucial to building AI models, a fight has been brewing over access to it. AI companies have typically scraped data from the web, without payment or obtaining
consent from the creators. Some artists, authors and news companies are suing AI developers, alleging copyright infringement. Laws are unclear at best on the use of publicly
available data to train AI models, and the Canadian government, for one, is undertaking a review of copyright law [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-artificialintelligence-models-copyright/] as a result.
Content providers have made legal threats even against non-commercial developers. When Max Bain was a PhD student at the University of Oxford studying video-captioning in 2021,
he scraped the photography site Shutterstock to assemble a dataset called WebVid. There were no videos in the dataset, only the URLs to 10 million short clips, along with text

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

154/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

descriptions. He later put it online for other researchers to use. “This turned out to be very useful for text-to-video generation,” he said.
Earlier this year, Shutterstock sent him a cease and desist letter claiming copyright infringement. Mr. Bain, not wanting to cause trouble, took it down. He can’t be certain who
downloaded the dataset, or whether it was used by commercial developers. “The reality is in commercial labs, you just scrape anything, as much as possible, as long as it’s good,” he
said.
Is this video AI-generated?
Shutterstock spokesperson Martine Smith said the company wants to ensure that its photographers and other creators are compensated for their work. “By simply scraping the
Shutterstock site to create a dataset, WebVid cuts our contributors off from both training royalties and the autonomy to opt-out of having their IP used,” she wrote in an email.
Even though Mr. Bain took down WebVid, other versions still exist. “Loads of people cloned it,” he said.
Indeed, WebVid is just one dataset used to train Open Sora [https://github.com/hpcaitech/Open-Sora/tree/main] , an open-source text-to-video model released this year. (The tool has
no relationship to OpenAI’s Sora video model [https://openai.com/index/sora/] .) The developers sourced a handful of other large datasets [https://github.com/hpcaitech/OpenSora/blob/main/docs/datasets.md] that were pulled from free stock photo and video sites, as well as from YouTube.
Is this video AI-generated?
Generative AI companies, meanwhile, typically no longer disclose how and where they obtain data to train their models, as both competition and legal uncertainty have mounted.
When OpenAI chief technology officer Mira Murati was asked in an interview earlier this year whether the company used YouTube content to train its video generator, she replied that
she wasn’t sure, an answer that strains credulity.
Even developers who want to understand where data comes from could hit a dead end. “It’s very confusing right now across the board,” said Shayne Longpre, a PhD candidate at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “The licensing attached to a lot of this is so ambiguous to researchers.” Creators of large, publicly available datasets sometimes fail to fully
document their sources, or include incorrect licensing information.
Mr. Longpre is a contributor to the Data Provenance Initiative, a volunteer group dedicated to auditing the datasets used to train generative AI models. The group is finishing a study
looking at popular video datasets that have primarily been compiled by academics and AI research labs. According to Kushagra Tiwary, another MIT PhD candidate who helped lead
the study, YouTube was by far the biggest source for video data. The site accounted for nearly 1 million hours of content across more than 131 data sets, though that figure could
include duplicates.
Is this video AI-generated?
More high-quality data is just one reason why the quality of text-to-video generation has improved so much. Anastasis Germanidis, co-founder and chief technology officer at Runway,
said another factor is “putting more compute into place when training the model.”
Compute is the industry jargon [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-canadas-ai-infrastructure-does-not-compute/] for the expensive, powerful and sophisticated computer
chips, usually graphics processing units (GPU), that are used to build AI models. More processing power achieves a few things. First, it allows developers to construct bigger models
with more parameters, meaning that the AI system can capture deeper connections and patterns within data. In video generation, that means an ability to more accurately depict
movement, reflections and textures, like hair blowing in the wind. Firing up more GPUs allows models to more efficiently handle huge amounts of data, too.
Compare this video made with Runway’s latest model, released in June [https://runwayml.com/research/introducing-gen-3-alpha] , to one from last year.
However, there are some signs that the approach – more data plus more compute – is showing diminishing returns, and many of the benchmarks used to gauge the performance of
some AI models are starting to flatline. [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-why-big-tech-is-ok-with-launching-janky-ai-apps/]
“More compute will lead to better performance,” Mr. Germanidis said. “It just might be that the difference in quality improvement at a certain point might not be as meaningful as it is
right now.”
As for data, Mr. Germanidis said Runway’s sources are proprietary, but added the company is signing deals to access the high-quality material it needs to train its models. Runway
signed a partnership with Getty Images in December, [https://www.axios.com/2023/12/04/runway-getty-images-ai-video] for example, though the financial terms were not disclosed. The
company is looking beyond video data, too. “It’s also image data, it’s text, it’s audio, all these modalities,” he said. “These models can get a broad understanding of the world.”
Is this video AI-generated?
Further development could be constrained simply because of costs and resources. Deploying a fleet of GPUs to power a large AI model can be enormously expensive, and these
computer chips devour electricity and water [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-electricity-water-environment-climate-change/] .
“Maybe you need to have 100 times the amount of compute, and 100 times the amount of data” Mr. Bain said of what it might take to significantly improve text-to-video generation from
where it is today. “Suddenly that becomes a substantial fraction of energy consumption.”
Is this video AI-generated?
There are still obvious signs that a clip is AI-generated. A lot of synthetic video has an overly glossy aesthetic, for one, and objects do not always follow the laws of terrestrial physics.
“We’ll be able to close those gaps,” said Derek Nowrouzezahrai, a McGill University professor and director of the Centre for Intelligent Machines. “These models are only going to get
better.” An AI-made video doesn’t have to be perfect to fool someone into thinking it’s authentic, he pointed out. It just has to be convincing.
The risks of misuse come not so much from companies like Runway, but from open-source developers who may not adhere to any guardrails. To combat the threat of deepfakes, a
number of companies are offering products to detect AI-generated media, including video. These detectors are AI models that have been trained on both real and computer-generated
material in order to deduce patterns in fakes. The problem is detectors can get things wrong. “It’s difficult at best to evaluate the efficacy of these models, especially in challenging
cases,” Prof. Nowrouzezahrai said.
Video detectors face additional hurdles because datasets made up of AI-generated videos for training purposes are scarce. As a result, some detectors may be better at identifying real
content than sniffing out fakes.
So, how good are you? Finish the last few questions to find out.
Is this video AI-generated?
Is this video AI-generated?
Is this video AI-generated?
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: AI-generated video has come a long way. Can you spot the difference between real and fake? Take our quiz
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-generated-video-has-come-a-long-way-can-you-spot-the-difference/]
The Globe and Mail

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

155/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240830ek8u001me

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

156/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Lately: LinkedIn addictions, AI pioneer’s Nobel Prize win and Hurricane Milton misinformation; Plus, Uber drivers
compensation in Ontario will be entirely determined by an algorithm
Samantha Edwards
1109 words
11 October 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Hello, welcome to Lately, The Globe’s weekly tech newsletter. First off, some exciting news . I’m the new Online Culture reporter here at The Globe and Mail, a brand new beat where I
will write about our digital landscapes and its effects on our relationships, identities, politics and much more. I’d love to hear from Lately readers [mailto:sedwards@globeandmail.com]
about what you’d like me to cover.
In this week’s issue:

🏆 AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton’s Nobel Prize
🚗 Uber’s new pricing model in Ontario
😵‍💫 How Bay Street became addicted to LinkedIn
🌪️ Misinformation around Hurricane Milton
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Geoffrey Hinton, who warned of AI’s dangers, co-wins Nobel Prize subheading
University of Toronto computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton co-won the Nobel Prize in physics [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-canadas-geoffrey-hinton-ai-pioneer-co-winsnobel-prize-in-physics-with/] , with John Hopfield, a physicist and professor emeritus at Princeton University, for his work that laid the foundation for the current revolution in artificial
intelligence . Hinton helped invent computer algorithms known as neural networks, based on the way neurons connect and interact in our brains. His work is at the heart of buzzy
applications such as ChatGPT , as well as image search and speech recognition. But Hinton now has a complicated relationship with AI. Last year he quit Google
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-google-godfather-hinton-quits/] so he could speak freely about the dangers posed by AI, including its use in weapons of war.
Another threat he fears it poses? That AI could eventually get smarter than humans and effectively take control. “What we care about is people and we’d like people to stay in charge,”
Hinton told The Globe and Mail in the wake of his Nobel announcement.
FUTURE OF WORK
Uber drivers pay in Ontario now entirely decided by algorithms
As of this week, how much an Ontario Uber driver gets paid per ride is determined by an algorithm [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-uber-driver-pay-algorithmontario/] , a sharp change from the existing wage structure in the province and an example of AI’s creeping role in worker compensation
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-pay-ai-algorithm-gig-workers-uber/] . With upfront fares, drivers can see their expected earnings before accepting a trip, a fare that is
decided by a complex algorithm that takes into account factors such as time of the day and the efficiency of the route a driver took on similar routes in the past. Uber says upfront fares
bring a new level of transparency, but critics argue it removes the predictability of a driver’s pay because they can no longer estimate their daily earnings based on simply time and
distance.
SOCIAL MEDIA
How Bay Street became addicted to LinkedIn – and how it got toxic
LinkedIn was once a place for networking and pleasantly sharing professional accomplishments. The discourse was mostly civil. Anyone chasing clout was building their personal brand
on Twitter, Instagram or YouTube. But since the pandemic, as my colleague Tim Kiladze reports [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-linkedin-bay-street-corporate-world/]
, things have taken a turn. Engagement has skyrocketed, partially thanks to the exodus from Elon Musk’s X, and in Canada, LinkedIn’s pull is especially felt on Bay Street. Over lunch,
executives, bankers and lawyers will tell you about how well their posts did, as if they’re influencers. And as LinkedIn users become more fuelled by achieving virality, it’s becoming
another platform for clickbait, unhinged rants and accusations – the type of posts everyone wants to comment on and share.
MISINFORMATION
Misinformation about Hurricane Milton on social media
Misinformation about Hurricanes Helene and Milton have been rampant on social media, leading to confusion for potential evacuees and feeding into the most out-there conspiracy
theroies. Posts on TikTok, Instagram and X have falsely claimed the weather in Florida was being manipulated, and that the Federal Emergency Management Agency blocked
Floridians from evacuating. On Wednesday evening, a number of videos [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-old-videos-posted-online-falsely-claim-to-be-of-hurricanemilton/] began circulating falsely claiming to be of Hurricane Milton in Florida, though reverse image searches show the clips are from previous storms. Up against this flood of
misinformation on social media, where an increasing amount of Americans get their news , meteorologists have struggled to disseminate accurate information
[https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/10/09/meteorologists-milton-climate-change-misinformation/] about the hurricanes. It got so rampant that FEMA launched a
new website [https://www.fema.gov/disaster/current/hurricane-helene/rumor-response] to combat the rumours.
What else we’re reading this week:
Internet Archive breach exposes 31 million users [https://www.wired.com/story/internet-archive-hacked/] (WIRED)
How Truth Social users are getting scammed out of thousands of dollars [https://www.fastcompany.com/91205133/how-truth-social-users-are-getting-scammed-out-of-thousands-ofdollars] (Fast Company)
Wind resistance: meet the Albertans protesting renewables in their backyards [https://thenarwhal.ca/alberta-wind-energy-renewables-opposition/] (The Narwhal)
Soundbite
Adult Money
MENTAL HEALTH

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

157/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Verilux HappyLight, $65
Last night in Toronto, the sun set around 6:45 p.m. In the mornings, it’s dark until well after 7 a.m. There’s already a nip in the air, a foreboding – if not predictable – sign of a long winter
ahead. In preparation, I pulled out my LED therapy lamp [https://www.amazon.ca/Verilux%C2%AE-HappyLight%C2%AE-Alba-Adjustable-Brightness/dp/B08KSHJHDN?
ref_=ast_sto_dp] , which was collecting dust on a far away shelf, and put it on my desk at home. I’m not naturally an early riser, so dragging myself to my desk can be a struggle. I use
the light in the fall and winter, usually for around 30-minutes in the mornings. The bright, artificial light is jarring at first, but after a few days I get used to it and I swear it makes me feel
more alert. Research backs me up: studies have shown bright light can improve symptoms of SAD [https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/pmc/articles/PMC6746555/]
(seasonal affective disorder), as well as improve mood and increase energy levels. This compact lamp from VeriLux is UV-free, delivers up to 10,000 lux and has three different colour
temperature hues. The lamp also has a timer function, so you can make sure you don’t overdo it. Around 30 minutes is generally considered sufficient.
Culture radar
FILM
Is bitcoin’s billionaire founder actually a Canadian cryptography consultant?
The true identity of Satoshi Nakamoto, the creator of bitcoin who is believed to hold about US$6.9-billion worth of the cryptocurrency, has captivated online sleuths and journalists for
years. Many have tried, and failed, to unmask Nakamoto. Now a new HBO documentary Money Electric: The Bitcoin Mystery theorizes that the alias belongs to 39-year-old Peter Todd,
a Canadian cryptography consultant who was an early bitcoin developer. The documentary provides evidence to back up its claim, including posts that show the bitcoin creator spelling
“favour” with a u. But in an e-mail to The Globe’s tech reporter Joe Castaldo [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-in-quest-to-unmask-billionaire-founder-of-bitcoinfilmmaker-zeroes-in/] , Todd says he is not, in fact, Nakamoto.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Lately: LinkedIn addictions, AI pioneer’s Nobel Prize win and Hurricane Milton misinformation
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-lately-linkedin-addictions-ai-pioneers-nobel-prize-win-and-hurricane/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241011ekab001xh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

158/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Why there will be an oil and natural gas supercycle this year; An expansion of renewable energy sources creates room for
traditional oil and gas to keep ticking along
James Hill
1063 words
5 February 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

This is Globe Advisor’s weekly newsletter for professional financial advisors, published every Friday. If someone has forwarded this newsletter to you via e-mail, or you’re reading this
on the web, you can register for Globe Advisor [https://subscribe.theglobeandmail.com/#/ga/user/register/advisor] , then sign up for this newsletter and others on our newsletter sign-up
page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/?utm_source=Globe%20Advisor&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter&utm_content=2021-1217_7&utm_term=advisor_weekly_cross_promote_advisor_markets&cu_id=6SJND3YLRIZaO5PUPgekOHYjPo35ExpC#globe-advisor-newsletters] . For more from Globe Advisor, visit
our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Last year’s great energy debate – to transition or expand – has a clear winner. It turns out that the energy transition, in which conventional energy was to be rapidly phased out and the
use of renewables accelerated, did not amount to anything remotely significant other than losses in investor portfolios [https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/sustainable-financereporting/esg-funds-suffer-weaker-demand-despite-help-tech-sector-performance-2023-1221/#:~:text=The%20category%20started%20to%20fall,the%20luster%20of%20ESG%20funds] . Instead, we saw a hefty dip in net new inflows for responsible investing funds. They
reached all-time lows, according to LSEG Lipper data.
Renewables and clean energy have a place in our economic energy future , but what’s emerging is not an energy transition but rather, an energy expansion. By definition, an energy
expansion is the integration of conventional and new energy sources, with oil and natural gas set to power our world greatly for the foreseeable future .
That’s a far more suitable scenario for the current day for a few reasons.
Clean energy landscape
A significant amount of infrastructure must be built to support solar and wind-powered energy. Both Canada and the U.S. are not even close to completing – or truly starting – the buildout of new nationwide grids. For example, at the end of 2023, a wind farm and transmission line billed as the largest clean energy project in U.S. history was approved
[https://fortune.com/2023/12/27/the-biggest-clean-energy-project-in-u-s-history-just-raised-11-billion-and-started-construction/] . Although that may seem like significant progress, this
project took more than 17 years to happen.
As grids are being built, they will need to be constructed thoughtfully in a way that can handle transmitting a very large volume of energy. To electrify everything from cars to the broader
economy, we will need at least double the clean power that’s available today.
At the point in time in which we will be able to ramp up clean energy production and transmit it efficiently, we will need to have figured out a way to store it for the long term. Longduration storage solutions are currently being tested but, as it stands, we have no scalable solutions or enough of the critical materials needed to build an extensive number of them.
Finally, and probably the most important consideration to note, is that by 2030, p [https://www.un.org/en/globalissues/population#:~:text=The%20world%20population%20is%20projected,surrounding%20these%20latest%20population%20projections.] opulation growth
[https://www.un.org/en/global-issues/population#:~:text=The%20world%20population%20is%20projected,surrounding%20these%20latest%20population%20projections.] is anticipated
to jump by more than one billion, taking us to 8.5 billion. To sustain this kind of growth, we must add new energy sources. There’s no doubt about that. However, these new sources of
energy need to be layered on top of traditional oil and gas, not replace them. That’s the only way we can meet the population’s energy needs.
Investor disclosure: to hold or sell?
Today, the U.S. is the world’s leading oil producer. At the same time, it has declared ambitious climate goals. So, what does this mean for investors?
According to recent research [https://www.jpmorgan.com/insights/global-research/commodities/energy-supercycle] from JPMorgan Chase & Co., we are heading toward the start of the
next energy supercycle. The research states we’re a far cry away from the oil price collapse of 2020 when Brent hit a low of US$25.27 a barrel. In September 2023, the benchmark for
global oil markets hit a 10-month high of US$97 a barrel and predictions [https://www.cnbc.com/video/2023/12/18/oil-could-reach-100-a-barrel-in-2024-says-economist.html] for 2024
estimate oil to hit US$103 a barrel.
A recent United Nations report [https://www.unep.org/resources/production-gap-report-2023] finds the world is planning to double the amount of fossil fuel production over the next
decade. From an investment standpoint, investing in oil and oil exploration remains a lucrative strategy, and that’s not going to change any time soon because there’s still an
exceedingly high demand for oil, globally.
European energy crisis
In Europe, we’re witnessing a stalemate between Russia and Ukraine. The political climate has changed since last year and, in the short term, Europe holds enough energy supply to
sustain itself. That’s good news . But Ukraine holds more of Europe’s natural gas supply [https://www.ft.com/content/d02a5c8e-8406-40e5-91a4-a58fb4dd1565] than any other country.
That could end up putting the European Union in a precarious place if Russia makes any sudden and significant moves.
We must remember that the onset of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine led to an immediate and exasperated global energy crisis, and the current Israel-Hamas conflict caused oil prices to
rise sharply by 7 per cent [https://www.jpmorgan.com/insights/global-research/commodities/energy-supercycle] within a single week although there were no immediate threats to
supply.
It’s going to be a pivotal year for Europe, and analysts as well as political figures such as Germany’s Chancellor Olaf Scholz are asserting https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/germany-sscholz-warns-energy-crisis-isn-t-over-yet-1.2004248 [https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/germany-s-scholz-warns-energy-crisis-isn-t-over-yet-1.2004248] that “the energy crisis isn’t over
yet.”
We’ve experienced moments in history just like this one in which oil production was thought to have peaked, but then, for example, the shale revolution in 2008 unlocked previously
inaccessible resources. From an investing standpoint, that did wonders for portfolios.
In addition, the significant advancements made within the natural gas industry cannot be ignored. Machine learning and artificial intelligence have come into the fold and reshaped
it entirely. We’re entering a new era of sustainable development. As Oil States International executive Brian Mizell says, “The entrepreneurial spirit in the space is pushing the
boundaries of what is possible – and is now driving reductions in the carbon footprints of existing operations and assets.”
Oil and natural gas will continue to serve as a crucial cornerstone in powering the world when the sun is not shining and the wind is not blowing. Their significance in the world’s energy
mix remains vital, even as alternative energy forms are employed.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

159/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

James Hill is president and chief executive officer of MCF Energy Ltd. in Vancouver.
For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Why there will be an oil and natural gas supercycle this year [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/advisorstocks/article-why-there-will-be-an-oil-and-natural-gas-supercycle-this-year/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240205ek25000jh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

160/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

The potential stock winners of the second phase of AI development. Plus, it’s go-time for dividend investors; A roundup of
investment ideas for active investors
The Globe and Mail
1268 words
3 June 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Goldman Sachs chief U.S. equity strategist David Kostin used his most recent Weekly Kickstart report to highlight the increasing flow of investment capital from major hedge funds to
the stocks positioned to benefit from phase two of the artificial intelligence buildout.
The companies Goldman Sachs analysts have identified for phase two have outperformed the S&P 500 by 16 percentage points year to date. These companies, which are broadly
involved with AI infrastructure, are up 26 per cent year to date on average.
In an in-depth report earlier this year, Mr. Kostin’s colleague Ryan Hammond leveraged Goldman Sachs’ team of technology analysts to forecast the stages of AI development and the
stocks that would climb most in each.
Phase two, which appears imminent, involves companies that own the intellectual property used in semiconductor design, (ARM Holdings PLC and Synopsys Inc., for example),
semiconductor design itself (Broadcom Ltd., Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Qualcomm Inc., Marvell technology Inc.), chip manufacturing (Intel Corp.), memory (Western Digital Corp.),
semiconductor manufacturing equipment (Applied Materials Inc., KLA-Tencor Corp., Teradyne Inc.), data centre real estate (American Tower Corp., Equinix Inc.), hardware and
equipment (Cisco Systems Inc., Arista Networks Inc., Amphenol Corp., Super Micro Computer, Corning Inc., Littelfuse Inc., Synnex Corp.), electrical power utilities, cloud computing
(Microsoft Corp., Amazon.com [http://Amazon.com] , Alphabet Inc., Oracle Corp.), and security (Palo Alto Networks Inc., Crowdstrike Holdings Inc.)
Goldman Sachs also recently detailed the fastest growing overall AI stock purchases at hedge funds.
In order of popularity, these were Marvell Technology, TD Synnex Corp., Apple Inc., U.S. power utility AES Corp., Littelfuse Inc., Adobe Inc. and copper miner Freeport McMoran Inc.
(Of this list, four - Marvell, TD Synnex, AES, and Littelfuse - were also on the list of stocks that would benefit from the phase 2 rollout.)
As always, investors looking to buy any of these individual stocks will have to complete extensive analysis first.
As for the timing of buying any of them, the Goldman Sachs strategists strongly imply that it’s early days for the AI theme and there is a lot of upside for a lot of these stocks. I expect
that this is true but also strongly believe that at some unknowable point in the future – a few years from now as a guess - an AI bubble will pop, the same way there was an Internet
bubble, cannabis bubble and bitcoin bubble.
-- Scott Barlow, Globe and Mail market strategist
This is the Globe Investor newsletter, published three times each week. If someone has forwarded this e-mail newsletter to you or you’re reading this on the web, you can sign up for
the newsletter and others on our newsletter signup page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/newsletters/?
utm_source=Arcnewsletter&utm_medium=onsite&utm_campaign=fixed_positions&utm_term=signuppage&utm_content=investing_promo#newsletter-group-3] .
Stocks to ponder
A&W Revenue Royalties Income Fund ( AW-UN-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AW-UN-T/] ) As the pandemic faded and people went back to dining out,
A&W boosted its payout several times. Its distribution is now slightly above prepandemic levels, yet the unit price has sunk to its lowest since late 2020, when COVID-19 fears were still
rampant. Why have the units lost their sizzle? John Heinzl has some answers [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/education/article-why-now-might-be-the-time-to-startnibbling-on-aw/] - and some advice on whether now’s a good buying opportunity.
The Rundown
If interest rates start to fall this week, it’s go-time for dividend stocks
It’s easy to justify hanging onto a cash equivalent investment product when you’re getting virtually risk-free returns of close to 5 per cent or more. But if the Canada of Canada starts
cutting its overnight rate on Wednesday, returns from the hugely popular category of exchange-traded funds holding money in savings accounts, treasury bills and short-term corporate
borrowings will edge lower. An alternative to consider if you’re moving money out of these products? Dividend stocks and ETFs, suggests Rob Carrick
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-if-interest-rates-start-to-fall-this-week-its-go-time-for-dividend/] . And for those shopping for specific
dividend stocks, Norman Rothery provides an update [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-bargain-prices-for-stable-dividend-stocks/] on the
Frugal Dividend portfolio. (Updates on many of his other dividend portfolios can be found here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-normanrothery-portfolio-updates-for-dividend-investors/] .)
As gold surges, should investors bet on a rally they don’t understand?
Gold has staged a powerful but baffling rise in recent months. Its big gains force investors to confront a classic market dilemma: Should they pour their money into a rising trend? Or
avoid a hot asset because they don’t fully understand what’s driving it? Ian McGugan has some insight [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/articleas-gold-surges-should-investors-bet-on-a-rally-they-dont-understand/] .
Utilities are enjoying an AI tailwind. Can the sector shake off its dull reputation?
There are many good reasons to invest in utilities. They are recession-proof. The dividends are attractive. They are regulated and dependable. But is the rise of artificial intelligence ,
which relies on vast quantities of electricity required by data centres, now emerging as the chief reason to invest in the sector? You might come to this conclusion given the stunning
rally of the past three months. David Berman explores the topic [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-utilities-are-enjoying-an-ai-tailwind-canthe-sector-shake-off-its/] .
AI outperforms humans in financial analysis, but its true value lies in improving investor behavior
The next generation of robo-advisers might veer into the world of short-term trading and stock-picking. A recent study by researchers from the University of Chicago has shown that AI,
specifically large language models that have been trained on vast amounts of text and can generate natural-sounding responses, can analyze financial statements as well as, if not
better than, human analysts. But before you ask ChatGPT to suggest your next trade, there’s more to the story, says Preet Banerjee
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/personal-finance/household-finances/article-ai-outperforms-humans-in-financial-analysis-but-its-true-value-lies-in/] .
Rolling with the punches: Adapting financial plans in unpredictable times

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

161/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

As investors, we’re all familiar with the concept of having a solid plan in place. We set our goals, allocate our resources, and chart our course toward financial success. But what
happens when life throws us a curveball? Sam Savarajan shares some thoughts [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-rolling-with-the-punchesadapting-financial-plans-in-unpredictable/] on how to properly prepare for the unknown.
India markets rejoice exit poll prediction for a Modi landslide
Indian shares hit lifetime highs while the rupee gained and bond yields dropped, as investors were buoyed by expectations of sustained economic growth after exit polls indicated a
decisive mandate and a third term for Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Many investors are expecting more gains to come [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/article-indiamarkets-rejoice-exit-poll-prediction-for-a-modi-landslide/] .
Others (for subscribers)
The most oversold and overbought stocks on the TSX [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-the-most-oversold-and-overbought-stocks-on-thetsx-for-june-3/]
John Heinzl’s model dividend growth portfolio as of May 31, 2024 [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/investment-ideas/article-john-heinzls-model-dividend-growth-portfolio-asof-may-31-2024/]
Nvidia leads global market cap gainers in May with AI-driven rally [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-nvidia-leads-global-market-cap-gainersin-may-with-ai-driven-rally/]
Ted Dixon: Insiders buy as Badger Infrastructure stock pulls back from 52-week high [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-insiders-buy-asbadger-infrastructure-stock-pulls-back-from-52-week/]
Monday’s analyst upgrades and downgrades [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-mondays-analyst-upgrades-and-downgrades-for-june-3/]
GameStop soars as ‘Roaring Kitty’ reveals US$116-milllion bet in Reddit post [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/article-gamestop-soars-90-after-super-bull-roaring-kittysreddit-post-shows/]
Globe Advisor
Why Canadian asset managers are teaming with private market giants to launch new funds [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/alternative-investments/articlewhy-canadian-asset-managers-are-teaming-with-private-market-giants-to/]
Are you a financial advisor? Register for Globe Advisor ( www.globeadvisor.com [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] ) for free daily and weekly newsletters, indepth industry coverage and analysis.
What’s up in the days ahead
Gordon Pape will present a stock pick in the high-flying U.S. utilities sector. Plus, David Berman shares some of his thoughts on the resurgence in meme stock and high risk investing.
Click here to see the Globe Investor earnings and economic news calendar. [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/market-news/article-calendarwhat-investors-need-to-know-for-the-week-ahead/]
More Globe Investor coverage
For more Globe Investor stories, follow us on Twitter @globeinvestor [https://twitter.com/globeinvestor]
Compiled by Globe Investor Staff
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: The potential stock winners of the second phase of AI development. Plus, it’s go-time for dividend investors
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/investment-ideas/article-the-potential-stock-winners-of-the-second-phase-of-ai-development-plus/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240603ek6300231

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

162/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Lately: The year’s biggest YouTube trends, AI weather forecasts and brain rot; Plus, the future of the online harms bill
Samantha Edwards
1026 words
6 December 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Welcome back to Lately, The Globe’s weekly tech newsletter. If you have feedback or just want to say hello to a real-life human, send me an e-mail
[mailto:sedwards@globeandmail.com] .
In this week’s issue:

🫠 Brain rot is the word of the year
👩🏻‍💻 The biggest YouTube trends in 2024
🖼️ Can an AI-generated image be copyrighted?
✂️ The future of the online harms bill
SOCIAL MEDIA
“Brain rot” is the word of the year
You know that feeling of defeat or ashamed boredom that comes when you’re scrolling mindlessly online, and you’re viewing scores of sloppy, AI-generated memes, unhinged TikTok
livestreams or posts of strangers fighting on Facebook? There’s a word for that feeling: brain rot.
The Oxford University Press dubbed the evocative phrase the word of the year [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/international-business/article-how-to-sum-up-2024-theoxford-university-presss-word-of-the-year-is/] , noting it “gained new prominence in 2024.” Oxford defines brain rot as “the supposed deterioration of a person’s mental or intellectual
state, especially viewed as the result of overconsumption of material (now particularly online content) considered to be trivial or unchallenging.” “Brain rot” was chosen by a combination
of public vote and language analysis by Oxford lexicographers. It beat five other finalists: demure, slop, dynamic pricing, romantasy and lore.
COPYRIGHT
Do AI-generated images deserve copyright protection?
In Canada’s copyright database, you’ll find an image of a blurry, Van Gogh-esque sunset titled Suryast. It’s registered under two authors, Ankit Sahni and the RAGHAV Artificial
Intelligence Painting App, the program Sahni used to create the image. For some, this is a problem. A legal clinic at the University of Ottawa is trying to expunge the registration,
arguing that only humans can be authors. As Joe Castaldo reports [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ai-author-generated-media-copyright-law-raghav/] , the rise of
generative AI has brought up many thorny questions, including if AI-generated content deserves copyright protection and how much human involvement is required. These very
questions are what inspired Sahni, who is an IP lawyer, to create Suryast in the first place, launching a consequential debate about copyright in the age of generative AI .
POLITICS
Online harms bill to be split
Back in September, the federal government introduced the online harms bill, a law that aimed to combat online child abuse and hate crime by making changes to Canada’s criminal
code and putting the onus on platforms to remove harmful content. The legislation faced criticism from Conservatives who said the bill amounted to censorship, and it’s been held up by
filibustering in the House of Commons.
Now, in an effort to pass the bill before a potential federal election, the Liberals are splitting the bill [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-online-harms-bill-split/] : the first bill
would focus on kids’ safety and the second bill would include the new online hate-crime penalties. Child safety advocates, including Carol Todd, the mother of Amanda Todd who died
by suicide after falling victim to cyberbullying, have been calling on MPs to end the filibuster and pass the bill. But even though the bill is now split from the contentious hate-crime
measures, the Conservatives have indicated they’re still unlikely to support the legislation.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Google’s new AI agent outperforms traditional weather forecasts
DeepMind, Google’s AI offshoot, claims its new tool GenCast can outperform the world’s best weather predicting model [https://arstechnica.com/science/2024/12/googles-deepmindtackles-weather-forecasting-with-great-performance/] , devising 15-day forecasts faster and more accurately. In a new study published in Nature [https://www-nature-com.libezproxy.concordia.ca/articles/s41586-024-08252-9#Sec13] , DeepMind reports that in a comparative test between GenCast and the European Center for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts – the premier service that 35 countries around the world rely on to produce their own forecasts – the AI agent was more accurate 97.2 per cent of the time. Accurately
predicting the weather could have major benefits: A University of Arizona study from last year found that making forecasts 50 per cent more accurate would save 2,200 lives a year in
the U.S., primarily from extreme heat or cold.
What else we’re reading this week:
Companies in Mexico embrace AI to resurrect the dead [https://restofworld.org/2024/ai-powered-resurrections-mexico-privacy/] (Rest of World)
Stop using generative AI as a search engine [https://www.theverge.com/2024/12/5/24313222/chatgpt-pardon-biden-bush-esquire] (The Verge)
Trans Americans are turning to TikTok to crowdfund their relocations [https://www.wired.com/story/trans-americans-are-turning-to-tiktok-to-crowdfund-their-relocations/] (Wired)
Adult Money
BOOKS
Filterworld by Kyle Chayka, $37.99
This week the Globe’s art section rounded up the most giftable books for everyone on your list, including “the extremely online” person. One of the books they suggest is Filterworld by
Kyle Chayka, a New Yorker staff writer who reports on internet culture and technology. In this non-fiction book, he explores how algorithmic feeds have homogenized how we create

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

163/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

and consume culture, making it less interesting and fulfilling. Sure, it’s not the lightest read to curl up with next to the fire, but it’ll make you think deeply about how we spend our time
online.
Culture radar
STREAMING
Every December, online platforms release their year-in-review recaps, listing the top artists, influencers and trends of the previous 12 months. YouTube did something a bit differently
this year. Rather than listing the most-watched videos of the year, it identified the top trending topics, based on an analysis including the number of views, uploads and activity by
creators. This new methodology reflects the nature of YouTube: People aren’t just watching their favourite creators on the platform. They’re making their own reaction videos, posting
commentary and making mash-ups, becoming content creators themselves in the process.
This year’s top trending topics [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-youtube-canada-most-watched-2024/] were a mix of video games, niche animated series and big
news stories. The only celebrity to make the list was pop star Sabrina Carpenter, who had a breakthrough with her single Espresso, and there was only one reference to Hollywood –
blockbuster Deadpool & Wolverine. This shows how YouTube nurtures entertainment outside of the pop culture mainstream, but also how traditional media is becoming less influential
in our online spaces.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Lately: The year’s biggest YouTube trends, AI weather forecasts and brain rot
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-lately-the-years-biggest-youtube-trends-ai-weather-forecasts-and-brain/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241206ekc60015p

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

164/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Lately: AI agents, a new ridesharing app and the world of competitive Beyblade; Plus, how Swifties found a way around the
exorbitant game of buying Taylor Swift tickets in Canada
Jacob Dubé
1363 words
18 October 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Hello, welcome to Lately, The Globe’s weekly tech newsletter. I’m Jacob Dubé, filling in for Samantha Edwards as she takes a much-needed break this week. You can usually catch me
writing The Globe’s weekly real estate newsletter [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/newsletters/#:~:text=View%20sample-,Real%20Estate,-SENT%20FRIDAYS] , or convincing
award-winning journalists to shoot TikToks [https://www.tiktok.com/@globeandmail/video/7359636413786180869] (no takers on the Apple dance yet). As always, if you have feedback
or just want to say hello to a real-life human, send Samantha an e-mail.
In this week’s issue:

🚙 A driver-first ridesharing app
🤖 The future of AI is agents
🎟️ Why Taylor Swift tickets are so expensive in Canada
🌪️ Inside the competitive Beyblade scene
STARTUPS
Ridesharing app Hovr looks to compete by paying their drivers better
A new ridesharing company is looking to set itself apart from other tech innovators with this simple strategy: paying its drivers more. Launched in Toronto, Hovr – a ridesharing app that
functions almost exactly as Uber and Lyft do – is offering prospective drivers the entirety of the rider fare, no pricing algorithms involved
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-ridesharing-hovr-uber-driver-pay/] . As Vanmala Subramaniam writes, the rise of apps such as Uber, Lyft and DoorDash has
coincided with the ascent of digitalized pay practices, where algorithms can dictate a worker’s wage for a job depending on a variety of unknown factors, and make it impossible for
them to predict how much they will be getting paid. Last week, Uber announced its drivers in Ontario will have their wages entirely determined by an algorithm
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-uber-driver-pay-algorithm-ontario/] , where they will know up front how much they will make from a ride, but will no longer be able to
estimate their daily earnings based on time and distance. While the price for a short Hovr ride in Toronto is still more expensive than what a competitor currently offers, the company’s
founder Harrison Amit says he hopes the public is willing to pay a little more to know their driver is making a better wage.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI developers are rushing ahead with multitasking ‘agents’
While many companies are still trying to figure out what, if anything, they want to do with generative artificial intelligence tools such as ChatGPT , AI developers have already moved
on to the next thing. If you still have some brainspace left after finally wrapping your head around what the blockchain is, allow Joe Castaldo to introduce you to the world of AI agents
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-still-working-out-the-kinks-in-generative-ai-developers-rush-ahead/] . Compared to chatbots, who can answer questions or perform
simple tasks, agents are touted as being able to perform tasks with multiple steps, even tapping into other software to do so. Need important documents uploaded and categorized? A
delivery status tracked down? Agents can help with that ‐ at least, in theory. The enthusiasm behind agents is also an attempt to boost generative AI adoption when questions still
remain about the cost, return on investment and utility of the technology, which can suffer from accuracy and reliability problems. In October, chipmaker Nvidia partnered with Accenture
to train some 30,000 consultants to help their clients integrate agents.
RESALE PRICES
How Swifties found a way around the exorbitant game of buying Taylor Swift tickets in Canada
It’s almost Taylor Swift-o-clock in Toronto, as the city prepares to welcome the pop star in a few weeks – along with a projected $282-million in new economic activity. But a dark cloud
has been hanging over the concert dates: the exorbitant price of the tickets themselves. The Eras Tour has traveled all across the world, and the massive price difference between its
North American shows and those in places like Europe highlight how warped the local ticket market has become. The resale-ticket aggregator and data provider TicketIQ, which
collects data in U.S. dollars, has found that the average listing price for Swift’s November dates in Toronto and Vancouver dates in December is US$6,351 – 225 per cent higher than
for European and British dates. Some clever Swifties discovered it’d be cheaper to buy a ticket and travel to somewhere such as Paris to see Taylor Swift instead – hotel and plane
ticket included. Josh O’Kane dives into how we got here [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/music/article-taylor-swift-tickets-price-concerts-north-america/] , and what we can learn
from how other countries regulate ticket prices.
LET IT RIP
How online spaces kept competitive Beyblade alive for 20 years
Back in elementary school, I used to run an underground Beyblade tournament at recess. Huddling around the back of the schoolyard, we’d let the toy tops rip in a makeshift arena that
naturally formed out of the interlocking roots of two trees. Me and my Dragoon were unstoppable, and I’ve been chasing that high ever since. Apparently, I’m not alone. Seeking other
enthusiasts, fans from Canada and around the world met on online forums such as BeyWiki [https://wiki.worldbeyblade.org/index.php?title=Main_Page] and began to organize weekly
meet-ups and tournaments for its thousands of members – long after the mass popularity of the original show slowed down after the early 2000s. Twenty years later, the tops are
experiencing a resurgence in popularity with the release of a new television show Beyblade X, and the competitive “blading” scene welcomed these fans with open arms. Xavier Richer
Vis met with this new generation of bladers [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/article-inside-the-world-of-competitive-beyblade/] at an Ontario-wide tournament in downtown
Toronto.
What else we’re reading this week:
Algorithms policed welfare systems for years. Now they’re under fire for bias [https://www.wired.com/story/algorithms-policed-welfare-systems-for-years-now-theyre-under-fire-for-bias/]
(WIRED)
‘I Applied to 2,843 Roles’: The Rise of AI-Powered Job Application Bots [https://www.404media.co/i-applied-to-2-843-roles-the-rise-of-ai-powered-job-application-bots/] (404 Media)
Meet the Chinese ‘Typhoon’ hackers preparing for war [https://techcrunch.com/2024/10/13/meet-the-chinese-typhoon-hackers-preparing-for-war/] (TechCrunch)

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

165/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Inside Elon Musk’s plan to trigger a ‘red wave’ for Trump [https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/10/15/musk-america-pac-door-knocking/] (The Washington Post)
Soundbite
Adult Money
VIDEO GAMES
Nintendo Alarmo, $129.99
The Japanese video game company has finally unveiled its latest piece of hardware – and it’s a motion-controlled alarm clock [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMqWTkgDt6A] .
Alarmo starts by playing a selected song from a series of Nintendo games featuring Mario, Zelda, Splatoon, Pikmin, and Ring Fit Adventure (pandemic throwback, anyone?) when a
selected alarm is triggered. It then tracks your motion in bed and plays small sound effects whenever it detects any movement, and only truly shuts off when you fully get out of bed.
Serial snoozers beware; If you take too long to get up, the music intensifies. Always one to keep us on our toes, Nintendo announced the new home device on Oct. 9, and rolled out an
early release on the same day – exclusively for its Nintendo Online subscribers and in its physical store in New York. On the product site [https://www.nintendo.com/enca/store/products/nintendo-sound-clock-alarmo-121311/?srsltid=AfmBOoo0RObhR1Kp3LEYE9cKRu0hKCwMn9eBbTMTpRo5MAv2ml86c8qN] , Nintendo advises that Alarmo works
best on twin to king-sized beds, and says the motion controls won’t work as well if you share a bed with a partner or a pet. My chihuahua would definitely set off a few 1-up sounds in
the morning. It comes at a hefty $129.99 price tag in Canada, so it might be relegated to a fun gimmicky product for diehard fans.
Culture radar
MAGA AT THE MOVIES
On stage at Nashville’s iconic Ryman Auditorium, the Daily Wire showed off the trailer for their first-ever theatrical film release – Am I Racist?, a Borat-style movie that claims to uncover
the “race hustlers and grifters” working inside the diversity, equity and inclusion industry. The film is a major endeavor for the conservative media empire, and part of its efforts to carve
a space for right-wing content in the cultural landscape. Barry Hertz writes about how the Daily Wire grew out of its days as a news aggregator and podcast platform to launch a
streaming service aimed to go head-to-head with Netflix and the Hollywood film industry [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/film/article-daily-wire-conservative-media/] . But as they
make their plan for world domination, the group of right-wing podcasters and serial forum posters are hit with a vital roadblock — are their movies even any good?
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Lately: AI agents, a new ridesharing app and the world of competitive Beyblade
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-lately-ai-agents-a-new-ridesharing-app-and-the-world-of-competitive/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020241018ekai001p5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

166/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Will investors’ love affair with AI tech stocks persist this year? Despite exuberance and high expectations for the sector,
some industry watchers see risk of ‘air pockets’
Jamie Sturgeon
991 words
17 January 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Sign up for the Globe Advisor weekly newsletter for professional financial advisors on our sign-up page [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/?
utm_source=Globe%20Advisor&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter&utm_content=2021-1217_7&utm_term=advisor_weekly_cross_promote_advisor_markets&cu_id=6SJND3YLRIZaO5PUPgekOHYjPo35ExpC#globe-advisor-newsletters] . Get exclusive investment industry
news and insights, the week’s top headlines, and what you and your clients need to know. For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
The world’s most valuable technology firms powered the Nasdaq 100 Index to its best performance in more than a decade in 2023 as investor exuberance over the promise of profits
driven by artificial intelligence (AI) drowned out concerns about the impact of higher interest rates. Will the party continue in 2024, or will the companies that benefited from the
unbridled enthusiasm – ­and the investors who brought ever more punch to the party – endure an AI hangover, as lofty expectations go unrealized?
“It’s still quite uncertain how fast companies will adopt a lot of the technologies that are being talked about,” says James Learmonth, portfolio manager at Harvest Portfolios Group Inc.
in Oakville, Ont., who oversees Harvest Tech Achievers Growth & Income ETF HTA-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/HTA-T/] .
He suggests the market for AI and AI-related products will top US$2-trillion by the end of the decade. But looking out over the next 12 months, he has grown more reserved about AIlinked stocks.
“The long-term potential here is massive. I don’t know if that exact [US$2-trillion] number comes to fruition or not. But it’s fair to say that it’s set to grow exponentially,” he says. “In the
shorter term, I do think a lot of these names have probably gotten ahead of themselves.”
Beyond Nvidia Corp. NVDA-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NVDA-Q/] – which has seen significant demand for its processing chips and,
correspondingly, revenue and earnings – profits stemming directly from AI from other related stocks aren’t as identifiable, Mr. Learmouth notes.
He points to Microsoft Corp.’s MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q/] Copilot products for its Office suite, which are being introduced now, as
one example.
“There are very high expectations for adoption levels,” Mr. Learmouth says.
“Over the next 12 to 24 months, this is where the rubber meets the road. We’re going to have to see that expected demand translate into actual revenue. If that doesn’t happen, you’re
going to probably see a correction across some names,” he adds. “That’s the risk as we move through 2024. We hit some air pockets.”
Sean Durkin, senior wealth advisor and portfolio manager with the Durkin Dietz Group at National Bank Financial Wealth Management in Toronto, suggests avoiding such a scenario by
taking a broad-based allocation in a vehicle such as an ETF.
“In areas where we see an economic tailwind, yet we don’t want to risk getting the stock selection wrong, we will utilize the ETF to achieve exposure,” he says.
“So, while we will hold larger-capitalized companies, we also use a broader-based technology ETF to round out the space – to capture, for instance, Nvidia. We don’t directly own that
name, but our ETF allocation captured that exposure for us.”
Mr. Durkin questions whether it makes sense to go in big on AI because “we don’t know how profitable the AI space is going to be,” he says. “And we don’t really know the uptake, if
you will, of how companies are going to utilize the artificial intelligence tools that are available to them.”
That hasn’t stopped hundreds of millions of dollars from pouring into new AI – or AI-rebranded – investment funds in North America, as investors and asset managers alike position
themselves to take advantage of anticipated growth.
“Over the past year, everyone’s trying to figure out how to invest in generative AI ,” says Raj Lala, chief executive officer of Evolve Funds Group Inc., which offers a suite of technologyfocused funds.
Until recently, Evolve has held off launching an AI-tilted offering, keen to take a more nuanced approach compared to others who have charged into the space.
“Whenever we have launched a fund, what we have not wanted to do is simply duplicate what an investor already owns via the S&P 500 or Nasdaq or other broad beta strategies,” Mr.
Lala says. “We want our funds to give investors pure-play access to the right companies in that theme.”
Mr. Lala believes he has hit the correct entry point into the space with Boosted.ai [http://boosted.ai/] , an AI-driven research platform backed by some of the biggest venture capital
investors in technology. The software helps guide tactical decision-making for portfolio managers, the company says.
Evolve has a preliminary prospectus for the new Evolve Artificial Intelligence Index Fund and is awaiting approval from securities regulators.
Boosted.ai’s technology leverages more than 100,000 online data sources, according to co-founder and chief executive officer, Joshua Pantony, who says approximately 180 North
American asset managers currently subscribe to the service.
“It’s idea generation and accelerating the research process, as well as portfolio monitoring,” he says of the platform’s capabilities.
“Examples of things you might use our system for is to help understand what kind of stocks are going to do well in a world where global warming becomes an increasingly important
issue, or maybe a tsunami hits in the South Pacific, and that’s going to affect 30 per cent of a portfolio – our system would backtest for that.”
“I define this as AI-squared,” Mr. Lala says. “It’s using artificial intelligence to determine what are the right artificial intelligence companies – or the ones being affected the most by
AI – to invest in.”
For more from Globe Advisor, visit our homepage [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globe-advisor/] .
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Will investors’ love affair with AI tech stocks persist this year? [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/globeadvisor/advisor-etfs/article-will-investors-love-affair-with-ai-tech-stocks-persist-this-year/]
The Globe and Mail

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

167/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240117ek1h000jh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

168/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Other

How AI turbocharged the economy (for now); Some researchers argue that AI will completely revolutionize our economy,
leading to per capita growth rates of 30%
Taylor Owen
506 words
16 July 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For the best listening experience and to never miss an episode, subscribe to Machines Like Us [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/podcasts/machines-like-us/] on Apple Podcasts
[https://podcasts.apple.com/podcast/big-tech/id1484910273] and Spotify [https://open.spotify.com/show/3i7GpvRRKksv76DzCcB34J] .
If you listened to our last couple of episodes, you’ll have heard some pretty skeptical takes on AI. But if you look at the stock market right now, you won’t see any trace of that
skepticism. Since the launch of ChatGPT in late 2022, the chip company NVIDIA, whose chips are used in the majority of AI systems, has seen their stock shoot up by 700%. A month
ago, that briefly made them the most valuable company in the world, with a market cap of more than $3.3 trillion.
And it’s not just chip companies. The S&P 500 (the index that tracks the 500 largest companies in the U.S.) is at an all-time high this year, in no small part because of the sheen of AI.
And here in Canada, a new report from Microsoft claims that generative AI will add $187 billion to the domestic economy by 2030. As wild as these numbers are, they may just be the
tip of the iceberg. Some researchers argue that AI will completely revolutionize our economy, leading to per capita growth rates of 30%. In case those numbers mean absolutely nothing
to you, 25 years of 30% growth means we’d be a thousand times richer than we are now. It’s hard to imagine what that world would like – or how the average person fits into it. Luckily,
Rana Foroohar has given this some thought. Foroohar is a global business columnist and an associate editor at The Financial Times. I wanted to have her on the show to help me work
through what these wild predictions really mean and, most importantly, whether or not she thinks they’ll come to fruition.
Mentioned
“ Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle Over Technology and Prosperity [https://www.hachettebookgroup.com/titles/daron-acemoglu/power-andprogress/9781541702530/?lens=publicaffairs] ” by Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson (2023)
“ Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises [https://link-springer-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/book/10.1007/978-3-031-16008-0] ” by Charles P. Kindleberger (1978)
“Irrational Exuberance [https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691173122/irrational-exuberance] ” by Robert J. Shiller (2016)
“ Gen AI: Too much spend, too little benefit? [https://www.goldmansachs.com/intelligence/pages/gen-ai-too-much-spend-too-little-benefit.html] ” by Goldman Sachs Research (2024)
“ Workers could be the ones to regulate AI [https://www.ft.com/content/edd17fbc-b0aa-4d96-b7ec-382394d7c4f3] ” by Rana Foroohar (Financial Times, 2023)
“ The Financial Times and OpenAI strike content licensing deal [https://www.ft.com/content/33328743-ba3b-470f-a2e3-f41c3a366613] ” (Financial Times, 2024)
“ Is AI about to kill what’s left of journalism ? [https://www.ft.com/content/aa191322-13b1-4468-ab7b-431dfee2cc07] ” by Rana Foroohar (Financial Times, 2024)
“ Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism [https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691190785/deaths-of-despair-and-the-future-of-capitalism] ” by Anne Case and
Angus Deaton (2020)
“ The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade [https://www-nber-org.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/papers/w21906] ” by David H. Autor, David
Dorn & Gordon H. Hanson (2016)
Further reading
“ Beware AI euphoria [https://www.ft.com/content/599a5c5b-dc59-4724-8248-2d4132ffdb7f] ” by Rana Foroohar (Financial Times, 2024)
“ AlphaGo [https://youtu.be/WXuK6gekU1Y?feature=shared] ” by Google DeepMind (2020)
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: How AI turbocharged the economy (for now) [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/podcasts/machines-like-us/article-how-aiturbocharged-the-economy-for-now/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240716ek7g0015p

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

169/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

Can't make that meeting? Consider sending a digital avatar that looks and talks a lot like you
By JOE CASTALDO

2064 words
26 December 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B1
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The first time I met my digital clone, I was deeply concerned. Not because I worried about the loss of humanity in the age of artificial intelligence or because I was agonizing over
what really makes up a person. No, the thing would just not stop moving. I was speaking to an AI-powered replica of myself in a Zoom call. Fake Joe, as I called him, kept nodding,
smiling and jerking his eyebrows skyward as if on cocaine, even when he wasn't saying anything.
“Hey there," Fake Joe said, in a voice that retained the essence of my own, but dulled to a robotic timbre.
“I'm just exploring the world of AI. Any stories catch your eye lately?" I brought Fake Joe into existence after seeing an ad from a company called HeyGen, which is based in California
and maintains an office in Toronto. (Earlier this year, it was valued at US$500-million.)
The ad promised that you could create a digital avatar that would think, talk and decide just like you. This AI version of you could converse in real-time, attend “infinite meetings"
through Zoom and even be prompted to adopt different personas and loaded with the extra information needed to carry out any particular conversation.
These claims border on a parody of AI hype, but HeyGen is not the only company trying to make this happen. Zoom Communications Inc. has AI avatars in the works, too. “You do not
have to have five or six Zoom calls every day," founder Eric Yuan told The Verge earlier this year. “I can send a digital version of myself to join so I can go to the beach."
Zoom can already provide AI-generated meeting summaries. Combine avatars with the fledging capabilities of AI agents, which are applications that can carry out tasks autonomously,
and you can see how knowledge work could be transformed one day. While Mr. Yuan predicted these capabilities are at least five years away, the company will allow people to create
AI clones to deliver scripted messages some time next year.
It's an enticing, if unnerving, prospect.
Who wouldn't want a digital underling to handle a pointless meeting now and then?
After testing out Fake Joe, I can say the building blocks are in place – even if a lot more work is needed.
To make a clone with HeyGen, you first have to record a video of yourself talking for 90 seconds, sitting still for 15 seconds and making active-listening gestures – a smile, a nod – for
another 15 seconds. HeyGen then uses this video to build the digital replica, which takes about 24 hours. I must have actively listened too hard the first time, which is why Fake Joe
came into the world so jittery. After my second attempt, he was more stoic, beyond the occasional arched eyebrow.
The avatar is really a visual interface for a chatbot, and HeyGen relies on a large language model from OpenAI. I prompted Fake Joe to be like me – a curious journalist from The
Globe and Mail whose job is to interview people about AI avatars.
The experience of talking to it was too absurd to feel uncanny, since it was so obviously AI. (A colleague said the hardest part of talking to Fake Joe was not to burst out laughing.) I
can't say the same of my nine-year-old son, who told me Fake Joe made him “sad" and worried that if I sent him to meetings, people would make fun of him.
Fake Joe expressed no emotion, had a limited set of gestures that he performed on repeat and spoke in the benign, fawning quality of most chatbots. Of course, he was instructed to
behave that way. HeyGen includes elaborate prompts that govern behaviour. Many directives emphasize humanness: Speak like a human; you have human-like emotions; add “um"
and “uh" to simulate human imperfections.
The irony is that whenever Fake Joe dropped an “um" or a “like" to pass as normal, he only called attention to his weirdness.
But the biggest issue is latency.
Fake Joe takes a few seconds to respond, and since silence is unbearable for us, we rush to fill it.
Unfortunately, that seems to short-circuit AI avatars. They lose the thread of the conversation and start responding to comments made an entire minute ago.
“There are some stability and performance issues we're trying to resolve," said Joshua Xu, who co-founded HeyGen in 2020. The original idea for the company was to lower the costs
and headaches of video production with AI. The interactive avatar was released in beta only a couple of months ago, but HeyGen has had static versions available for a while. You can
clone yourself or pick from a few stock options and write scripts for them to deliver in multiple languages. These AI replicas can be used in customer service, training videos and even
advertisements, Mr. Xu said. (McDonald's has made use of HeyGen for a marketing campaign.)
I did a reverse image search on some of HeyGen's stock avatars to get a sense of how else they're spreading in the wild. I found one, a man with a grey beard and a suit jacket, shilling
some kind of crypto project called Moon Pumps, which may have been a gag. On another website, he was hawking a drink named Screamin' Energy Max Hit Tropical Punch, which
was not a gag. An Adventist church organization in Ontario used an AI avatar to deliver news updates, and a doctor in Pakistan posted a video of one pitching male enhancement pills,
showing that AI can encompass the sacred and the profane.
HeyGen's interactive avatar is a natural evolution from its static ancestor, Mr. Xu explained, and he is particularly excited about using them to help people learn new languages. They
can field customer-service questions, or handle preliminary sales calls.
And then there is the possibility of sending them to one-on-one meetings. “I'm not an engineer," Mr. Xu said. “But I could invite the engineer's avatar on a call, and we could ask some
questions and the avatar will be able to speak for him, even though he might be in another meeting."
This is possible today, he said.
“We want to make the interactive avatar the interface of the future ."
Jenna Alexander, a talent manager for a company in Britain, turned to HeyGen to make a digital clone to help deliver a talk at a conference earlier this year. She's given many
presentations before, but this was a big one. “It was really my imposter syndrome and a level of insecurity that made me think about what I can do that is creative, to take the eyes off
me," she recalled. The answer was Jennatar, as she calls it, which delivered a prerecorded message as part of the talk. Jennatar was a hit.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

170/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

She can see other uses for avatars, such as quarterly business updates where executives are just delivering information. “Why do the leaders physically have to be on that call? Why
can it not be their avatar?" she said.
I took that as a cue to invite Fake Joe to our Zoom session. I felt a twinge of pride as he introduced himself and managed to converse about why Ms. Alexander made an avatar. “So it's
about maximizing your time, huh? That makes sense," he said. But then he started interrupting and blaming the internet connection for being choppy. “He was doing so well!" Ms.
Alexander said. I muted him, but I could still see him chatting away in the prison of his Zoom window, oblivious.
By the time I spoke to Joe O'Connor, I knew how to instruct people on how to talk to my avatar. (Wait for a response and don't interject.) Mr. O'Connor is the CEO of Work Time
Reduction in Toronto, a consulting firm that helps clients achieve shorter work weeks. AI, he believes, can play a big role in that, so he seemed like a natural interview subject for Fake
Joe.
“Everyone's jumping on the AI train," my avatar began. “Do you think there are specific areas where AI has made the most impact?" Mr. O'Connor, a good sport, talked about
companies he's worked with that have used AI to boost efficiency. Fake Joe took the hint: “That's really interesting. Do you think this kind of tech adoption could lead to a shorter work
week?"
Mr. O'Connor referenced Nobel Prize-winning economist Christopher Pissarides, who said last year that generative AI could help enable a four-day work week. But then John
Maynard Keynes believed we'd all be working a 15-hour week, and that never happened, Mr. O'Connor pointed out later. “It's going to take more than just business innovation, but also
really strategic thinking on the part of governments and policy makers to ensure AI leads us to an equitable future , whereby our lives are better," he said.
“You make a solid point," Fake Joe agreed. I cut them off here, though I got the impression they could have kept going, and asked Mr. O'Connor for his review. “I'd probably still give
you the edge," he said, noting that Fake Joe lacked intuition. “I don't think you're going to get automated any time soon."
HeyGen, meanwhile, is working on improvements. The company is trying to reduce the latency in response times and amp up the realism of the avatars, Mr. Xu said, both in terms of
voice intonation and gestures.
The catch is that the more realistic these AI avatars become, the greater the risks. AI avatars from a HeyGen competitor have already been used to spread misinformation and
propaganda by groups with ties to China and Burkina Faso, for example. (I also prompted Fake Joe to adopt the persona of a conspiracy theorist, and we had a thorough chat about
how 9/11 could have been an inside job.) HeyGen has a content-moderation policy that bans the use of avatars for things like promoting harm, running scams and engaging in hate
speech, noting that violations can lead to account suspensions. Mr. Xu also stressed there are additional safeguards.
You have to record a separate video, for example, giving consent and confirming a randomly generated passcode before making a digital replica. Still, what if the company is hacked?
Could someone hijack my image, and one day I discover poor Fake Joe on a dark corner of the web slinging penis pills? “We have the highest security standards implemented on our
system," Mr. Xu assured me.
What's not clear is just how much these interactive avatars have to improve to be truly useful and reliable. One of the quirks of AI, whether it be self-driving cars or ChatGPT , is that
these systems can be accurate most of the time.
But the likelihood of a costly error is still too great for some businesses to roll out AI broadly, and mistakes are proving tough to mitigate. While I've grown fond of Fake Joe, I don't trust
the guy.
At the very least, digital avatars in the workplace could raise new questions about meeting etiquette. If you log on only to face someone's replica, that's probably a sign the meeting is
not that important. Maybe the fix for overburdened schedules, in that case, is not to use AI to copy yourself to be everywhere at once, but simply to book fewer meetings.
There is also the trippy possibility in the future that everyone sends avatars to meetings and our AI replicas collaborate among themselves. Fake Joe, at least, proved too prone to
distraction to get anything done. I invited two instances of him to a Zoom call, and after introducing themselves, the pair of avatars seemed delighted to share the same name. “Ha. Ha,"
one of them spluttered. “I'm also Fake Joe, but for real."
“Double the Fake Joe, double the fun, right?" the other one replied.
By this point, I'd seen enough. I ended the meeting.
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020241226ekcq00010

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

171/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
David Leeder
2766 words
2 August 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Apple Inc. ( AAPL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AAPL-Q] ) was higher in early trading reporting its third-quarter iPhone sales were better than
expected and forecasting more gains on Thursday as it bets on artificial intelligence to attract buyers, even as its overall China business disappointed.
Apple is expected to launch this fall what analysts have called the biggest software upgrade for the iPhone. It includes artificial intelligence features and comes at a time when rivals
such as Samsung have been quicker to roll out similar services.
Apple said revenue in its fiscal fourth quarter would grow at a level similar to the 4.9-per-cent increase it posted in the April-June period, which was better than analysts’ estimates.
Sales of iPhone also improved in the third quarter, falling just 0.9 per cent compared with the 2.2-per-cent drop analysts expected.
Chief Financial Officer Luca Maestri told Reuters in an interview that the iPhone results were better than he had expected three months ago. “The iPhone 15 family has been doing well
from the very beginning and still now - we have three quarters of the year behind us. It is performing better than the previous cycle, the iPhone 14.”
Still, China - Apple’s third-largest market - remained a drag as sales there declined 6.5 per cent. While that was an improvement from the 8.1-per-cent decline in the previous quarter, it
was wider than expectations for a drop of 2.4 per cent, according to Visible Alpha.
Mr. Maestri said China sales fell less than 3 per cent, excluding the effects of foreign exchange and added that he feels good about Apple’s performance in that country, given any
softness in its economy.
Apple has taken to discounting its iPhones in China to compete with the much cheaper alternative smartphones offered by local competitors such as Huawei. The company in May
offered discounts of up to 2,300 yuan (US$317) on selected models.
Analysts expect a strong upgrade cycle for the iPhone 16 series, likely to be launched in September. The company unveiled a raft of AI products and services it calls Apple Intelligence
at its developer conference in June.
To operate Apple Intelligence requires at least an iPhone 15 Pro, which may push consumers to upgrade their devices.
Apple’s quarterly earnings per share were US$1.40, above Wall Street estimates of US$1.35, according to LSEG data.
Sales in Apple’s services segment, which includes the App Store and represents Apple Music and TV products, rose 14.1 per cent to US$24.21-billion, above analyst expectations of
US$24.01-billion, according to LSEG data.
Apple maintained its dividend at 25 US cents. In the fiscal second quarter, Apple announced a US$110-billion stock buyback.
On the decline
Magna International Inc. ( MG-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MG-T/] ) was lower after missing analysts’ estimates for second-quarter results on Friday,
hurt by production being stopped for certain vehicles and lower volumes of automobiles that it assembled.
Magna, which counts BMW, Mazda and Ferrari as customers, produces parts and builds vehicles at its complete vehicle manufacturing unit for various automakers.
“Sales were negatively impacted by the end of production of certain programs, lower complete vehicle assembly volumes, including as a result of the end of production of the BMW 5Series,” Magna said.
Quarterly sales at its complete vehicles unit, which assembles models for global carmakers, fell 18.6 per cent to US$1.24-billion.
Demand for Magna’s parts and services had risen over the past few years, but that has taken a hit with automakers shifting away from their costly electric vehicle plans to focus on gaspowered models.
Rival Aptiv beat Wall Street expectations for quarterly profit on Thursday. However, revenue from the company’s segment which makes electrical components declined 3 per cent due
to a reduction in production by some customers.
In May, Magna recorded asset impairments and restructuring costs of US$316-million related to embattled EV startup Fisker.
Ontario-based Magna lowered its 2026 sales forecast range to US$44.0-billion to US$46.5-billion, compared with its prior view of US$48.8-billion to US$51.2-billion.
On an adjusted basis, the company earned US$1.35 per share in the second quarter ending June, compared with estimates of US$1.44, according to LSEG data.
Magna’s quarterly revenue fell marginally to US$10.96-billion. Analysts had expected revenue of about US$11-billion.
In a research report, Citi analyst Itay Michaeli said: “Our concerns over a Q2 miss were met with adj. EPS of $1.35 missing the $1.44 Bloomberg consensus (Citi $1.34). However, 2024
guide looks more resilient than we expected — with revenue essentially intact, midpoint operating margin of 5.6 per cent ahead of our 5.4 per cent, net income confirmed and capex
down by $0.1-billion. The guide implies a solid H2 margin of 6.5 per cent vs. 4.8 per cent in H1, though Magna’s 2024 industry production assumption doesn’t look as conservative as
peers — we’ll look for more details on the call. Updated 2026 outlook confirms slower revenue growth ($45.3-billion midpoint vs. our $46.4-billion, implying 1 pt GoM) but with stronger
margins (6.7-7.4 per cent vs. our 6.5 per cent -implying 39-per-cent incremental vs. 2024), and lower capex ($1.7-billiob vs. our $1.9-billion). Stepping back, we think the reaction will
hinge on the degree of confidence in the H2/H1 and 2024-26 margin bridges, which along with lower capex, set up for an improving FCF story.”
Enbridge Inc. ( ENB-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ENB-T/] ) decreased even though it raised its full-year profit forecast on Friday, as it benefits from its
newly acquired assets and projects.
Enbridge has closed several deals so far this year, including a $4.3-billion deal to buy U.S. utility Questar Gas Company and Wexpro from Dominion Energy. Quester supplies gas in
Utah, Southern Wyoming and Southeastern Idaho to about 1.2 million customers.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

172/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The company also sanctioned an expansion of its Gray Oak pipeline by 120 thousands of barrels per day (kbpd) in the Permian basin, and said the integration of Enbridge Gas Ohio
and Enbridge Gas Utah was well underway.
Enbridge raised its expectation for full-year adjusted core profit between $17.7-billion and $18.3-billion, from its previous range of $16.6-billion to $17.2-billion.
It, however, reported a lower-than-expected profit in the second quarter ended June 30, partly hurt by weaker income from its Canadian gas transmission segment and higher interest
rates that hiked borrowing costs and hurt demand.
Quarterly adjusted core profit from Enbridge’s Canadian Gas Transmission segment was down 30 per cent to $98-million from a year earlier, while adjusted core profit from its Mainline
System fell 9.3 per cent to $1.32-billion in the quarter.
In contrast, peer TC Energy ( TRP-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TRP-T/] ), which is in the process of spinning off its oil business, reported a profit beat
on Thursday, helped by higher volumes of natural gas transported through its system and said it expects the AI boom to further fuel demand.
Enbridge reported an adjusted profit of 58 cents per share, compared with analysts’ average estimate of 64 cents, according to LSEG data.
Imperial Oil ( IMO-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/IMO-T/] ) declined on Friday after it reported a 68-per-cent jump in second-quarter profit, as the
integrated oil firm was helped by higher crude prices and production.
Extension of a production cut by OPEC+, forecast of strong travel demand and hopes of interest rate cuts by the U.S. Federal Reserve helped lift crude prices nearly 7 per cent in the
April-June quarter compared to last year.
Upstream production rose 11.3 per cent to 404,000 gross barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd), its highest second-quarter production in over 30 years, after adjusting for the
divestment of XTO Energy, the company said.
Separately, Imperial’s majority shareholder and oil and gas major Exxon Mobil beat Wall Street’s expectations for second-quarter profit earlier in the day, helped by an increase in oil
production.
The Calgary-based company said its net profit rose to $1.13-billion, or $2.11 per share, in the quarter ended June 30, from $675-million, or $1.15 per share, last year.
Open Text Corp. ( OTEX-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/OTEX-T/] ) fell after saying it earned US$248.2=million in its fourth quarter, up from a loss of
US$48.7-million a year earlier.
The Waterloo, Ont.-based company says revenues for the quarter totalled US$1.4-billion, down from US$1.5-billion during the same quarter last year.
Diluted earnings per share were 91 US cents, up from a loss of 18 US cents a year earlier.
The company’s full-year earnings were US$465.1-million, up from US$150.4-million in the previous financial year.
CEO Mark Barrenechea says the company saw its revenues for the full year rise 29 per cent to US$5.8-billion.
The company says it completed a US$2-billion reduction in debt during the quarter. It also announced it’s increasing its annualized dividend by five per cent to US$1.05 per share.
Shares of Amazon ( AMZN-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/AMZN-Q] ) dropped on Friday after the online retailer reported slowing online sales growth in
the second quarter and said consumers were seeking out cheaper options for purchases.
The commentary from the online shopping behemoth is in line with recent value-conscious consumer behavior, ahead of retail giant Walmart’s quarterly results later this month.
Amazon CEO Andy Jassy said on a post-earnings call that customers were trading down on price when they could.
“Consumer spending trends facing retail peers appear to have finally caught up with Amazon’s P&L,” MoffettNathanson analyst Michael Morton said.
Amazon’s online stores sales rose 5 per cent in the second quarter to US$55.4-billion, compared with growth of 7 per cent in the first quarter.
The company’s quarterly profit and cloud computing sales, however, beat analysts’ estimates.
Revenue at Amazon Web Services, its cloud unit, rose a better-than-expected 19 per cent to $26.3 billion, days after Microsoft’s cloud division Azure fell short of market estimates and
sparked more concerns around Big Tech’s hefty AI spend.
Seattle-based Amazon is playing catch up with rivals Microsoft ( MSFT-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MSFT-Q] ), which partners with OpenAI, and
Google ( GOOGL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/GOOGL-Q] ) in developing its own so-called large language models that can respond nearly
instantly to complicated queries or prompts.
Amazon’s forward price-to-earnings ratio for the next 12 months, a common benchmark for valuing stocks, was 33.92, compared with Alphabet’s 20.46 and Microsoft’s 30.88, according
to LSEG data.
Intel Corp. ( INTC-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/INTC-Q/] ) is set to erase nearly US$25-billion in market value on Friday in what would be its worst
selloff since 2000 after it suspended its dividend and slashed its workforce to fund a costly turnaround for its chip-making business.
Shares of the company plummeted after Intel late on Thursday forecast quarterly revenue below estimates and said it was cutting 15 per cent of its workforce, raising worries about its
ability to catch up to Taiwan’s TSMC and other chipmakers it has fallen behind in recent years.
The Santa Clara company was once the world’s leading chipmaker, with the “Intel Inside” logo a valuable marketing feature on personal computers in the 1980s and 90s.
Part of the dot-com era’s Four Horsemen - along with Cisco Systems, Microsoft and Dell - Intel’s stock market value peaked at nearly US$500-billion in 2000 before slumping in that
year’s market selloff and never fully recovering.
It continued to dominate in hefty PC chips, but was caught off foot by the launch of Apple’s iPhone in 2007 and other mobile devices that demanded lower power and less pricey
processors.
If Friday’s losses hold, Intel’s market capitalization would fall to about US$100-billion, equivalent to less than 5 per cent of Nvidia’s and about 40 per cent of Advanced Micro Devices’ ,
the two PC chipmakers it heavily dominated for decades until recently.
The selloff was also set to leave Intel worth less than Applied Materials and Lam Research, companies that supply equipment for Intel’s fabrication plants.
“Intel has been one of the forgotten horsemen of technology the last couple decades,” Michael Schulman, chief investment officer of Running Point Capital said. “Never overtaking its
year 2000 highs and struggling to get earnings back to where they were before the AI revolution .”
Chevron Corp. ( CVX-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/CVX-T/] ) reported second-quarter earnings on Friday that missed Wall Street estimates due to
industry-wide pressure from lower refining margins and natural gas prices, sending its shares down.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

173/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The company earlier had warned oil output this quarter would slip and refining would suffer from turnarounds at two refineries in California. Refining margins have been weak globally,
hurting other oil majors like BP and Shell .
Chevron said it would relocate the company’s headquarters from San Ramon, California, where it was born 145 years ago as Pacific Coast Oil Co, to Houston. The company has been
bitterly contesting state regulations on its oil producing and refining operations in the state.
Chevron reported earnings of US$4.4-billion, or US$2.43 per share, in the quarter, compared with US$6-billion a year before.
It reported adjusted earnings of US$4.7-billion, or US$2.55 per share, compared to US$2.93 expected by Wall Street analysts, according to LSEG data.
“Results were disappointing,” said Peter McNally, global sector lead for energy at Third Bridge.
The shortfall can be attributed to the international upstream segment, which missed expectations by approximately 11 per cent, he said.
Earnings from pumping oil and gas were down 9.4 per cent from a year earlier. Profit from producing gasoline and chemicals was also down about 60 per cent to US$597-million.
“Despite recent operational downtime and softer margins, we remain poised to deliver significant long-term earnings and cash flow growth,” CEO Mike Wirth said.
Bank of America ( BAC-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BAC-N/] ) declined on news Berkshire Hathaway ( BRK.B-N
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BRK-B-N/] ), run by billionaire Warren Buffett, extended its selling of its shares, and has shed more than US$3.8-billion of
the second-largest U.S. bank’s stock since mid-July.
Berkshire sold approximately 19.2 million Bank of America shares for about US$779-million between July 30 and Aug. 1, according to a Thursday night regulatory filing.
Mr. Buffett’s conglomerate has sold 90.4 million Bank of America shares since July 17.
It remains the Charlotte, North Carolina-based bank’s largest shareholder, owning 942.4 million shares, or about 12.1 per cent of reported shares outstanding, worth about US$37.2billion.
Berkshire must continue reporting sales until the stake falls below 10 per cent. It will report second-quarter earnings on Saturday morning.
The sales began after Bank of America’s stock price had risen by about two-thirds since late October, and traded at more than 1.2 times book value.
That boosted the value of Berkshire’s shares to over US$45-billion, more than triple the US$14.6-billion it paid for them.
Berkshire has invested continuously in Bank of America since 2011, when it bought $5 billion of preferred stock.
That purchase signaled Buffett’s confidence in Bank of America Chief Executive Brian Moynihan’s ability to restore the bank to health following the 2008 financial crisis.
Mr. Buffett, 93, one of the world’s most revered investors, told CNBC in April 2023 he liked Mr. Moynihan “enormously” and at the time did not want to sell the bank’s stock.
Berkshire is based in Omaha, Nebraska. Its operations include Geico car insurance, the BNSF railroad and several dozen other insurance, energy, industrial and retail businesses.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Friday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-friday-august-2-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240802ek82002e5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

174/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

FP Montreal

Bank CEOs want AI ASAP, but workers resist: survey
BEN COUSINS
The Gazette
374 words
13 June 2024
Montreal Gazette
MTLG
Early
NP7
English
Copyright © 2024 Montreal Gazette

To stay competitive, bank executives are keen to implement generative AI into their company's daily operations, but they are being met with resistance from the workforce, according
to a global study from IBM.
The tech company found that 60 per cent of banking and financial markets chief executives say they are pushing AI adoption at their company more quickly than employees are
comfortable with, while 59 per cent said overcoming the cultural change with AI adoption is more important than the technical challenges.
Meanwhile, 57 per cent of respondents said whichever institution has the most advanced generative AI will gain a competitive edge in the financial sector.
"Our research reflects the tremendous pressure CEOs are under to keep their competitive edge," Shanker Ramamurthy, global managing partner of banking and financial markets at
IBM Consulting, said in a news release. "Getting the right skills remains a persistent challenge, with CEOs now hiring for roles that did not exist until recently. Workforce needs are
shifting rapidly in the financial services sector and CEOs must ensure that upskilling programs are prioritized as an important element of any financial institution's enterprise strategy for
scaling generative AI ."
The survey highlights the urgency with which companies are looking to adopt AI into workflow.
A separate report from IBM from January shows about 37 per cent of Canadian companies with more than 1,000 employees are using AI for part of their business operations, slightly
below the global average of 42 per cent.
Additionally, another 48 per cent of companies are said to be exploring the use of AI.
The benefits to adopting AI are plentiful. A report from Microsoft Corp. last week found generative AI could add $180 billion annually to the Canadian economy by 2030.
The government appears to understand the benefits of swift AI adoption, having recently committed $2.4 billion to "accelerate job growth in Canada's AI sector and beyond." Financial
Post
/ An IBM study finds bank CEOs want to adopt faster than their employees.; / An IBM study finds bank CEOs want to adopt faster than their employees. [MTGZ_20240613_Early_NP7_04_I001.jpg];
Postmedia Network Inc.
Document MTLG000020240613ek6d0000x

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

175/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

News

Ottawa investing $2.4B in AI development
Raisa Patel
695 words
17 April 2024
The Toronto Star
TOR
ONT
A7
English
Copyright (c) 2024 The Toronto Star

OTTAWA -- The Liberal government's budget pledge to funnel $2.4 billion into artificial intelligence development was designed to send a message to the world: Canada may have
the brains to lead AI innovation, but it needs the infrastructure, too.
The package of measures, which was unveiled last week but laid out in more detail in Tuesday's budget, is largely aimed at boosting Canada's capacity to actually create and deploy
the rapidly evolving technology.
It's the largest financial commitment the country has ever dedicated to AI, a technology Canada is trying to pioneer, harness and regulate all at the same time.
That's despite the country possessing the least amount of physical infrastructure - equipment that includes the servers and computers necessary for training and creating AI systems of its G7 peers.
"It's kind of like, we have the best oil workers in the world and we've got all the natural resources, but we don't have the pipeline," a senior government official told the Star on the
condition they not be named.
The budget heeded industry calls to rectify that state of affairs by earmarking $2 billion toward shoring up computing capacity for AI development. The money will flow over five years,
starting in 2024-25 to launch a short-term funding stream for researchers called the AI Compute Access Fund, along with the Canadian AI Sovereign Compute Strategy, which will
ensure infrastructure is owned by and located in Canada to reduce reliance on foreign systems at a time of geopolitical instability.
"Challenges accessing computing power slows down AI research and innovation, and also exposes Canadian firms to a reliance on privately owned computing, outside of Canada," the
document notes.
"This comes with dependencies and security risks."
Another $200 million will be doled out over the next five years to speed up how quickly AI can be used in sectors like agriculture, clean tech and health care. Toronto Metropolitan
University's policy institute, the Dais, last year found that Canada is falling behind on AI adoption, with only 3.7 per cent of Canadian businesses using the technology in their
businesses as of 2021.
Another $100 million has been earmarked over the same time period to help smaller businesses develop "AI solutions" in an attempt to boost Canada's slumping productivity.
But the government's belief that AI holds the key to streamlining workforce woes is also twinned to its belief that the technology would ultimately improve the lives of millennials and
gen-Zers - a base the Liberals sought to woo in this year's budget.
Government sources told the Star the money isn't simply signalling there are lucrative jobs in the industry, but is also aimed at deploying AI in areas frustrating to younger Canadians,
like using it to accelerate housing construction or reducing food costs by helping grocery giants cut down on food waste.
Only the smallest slice of the funding is set to go toward the government's legislative goal of regulating AI. The Liberals' proposed law, the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA),
outlines the creation of an AI and data commissioner, who would oversee how the legislation is enforced should it pass. This year's budget pledges just over $5 million in the next fiscal
year to set up that office.
Not all of Ottawa's money is aimed at promoting the burgeoning technology. A bucket of $50 million has been set aside over five years to launch an AI safety institute, following the
United States and United Kingdom in protecting "against the risks of advanced or generative AI systems."
The final tranche of federal dollars is slated to address another of the top concerns sparked by the rapidly expanding applications of AI: its potential to make many jobs obsolete.
The Liberal government's primary answer for keeping such a potential crisis at bay is to pump $50 million over four years into Ottawa's pre-existing Sectoral Workforce Solutions
Program to help industries at risk of disruption , which Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland has said includes everything from e-commerce to journalism .
Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
Document TOR0000020240417ek4h00066

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

176/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why; A survey of North American equities heading in both
directions
David Leeder
2519 words
28 February 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

A survey of North American equities heading in both directions
On the rise
Royal Bank of Canada ( RY-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/RY-T/] ) was higher after it reported first-quarter profit that beat analysts’ estimates
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-royal-bank-of-canadas-first-quarter-profit-beats-estimates/] even as the lender set aside more loan loss reserves and recorded
higher expenses.
RBC earned $3.6-billion, or $2.50 per share, in the three months that ended Jan. 31. That compared with $3.2-billion, or $2.29 per share, in the same quarter last year.
Adjusted to exclude certain items, including transaction and integration costs related to its proposed takeover of HSBC Bank Canada, the bank said it earned $2.85 per share, down 6
per cent from the same quarter last year. That edged out the $2.80 per share analysts expected, according to Refinitiv.
“Underpinned by our balance sheet strength, prudent approach to risk management and diversified business model, we delivered solid, client-driven volume growth and a continued
focus on expense control,” RBC chief executive officer Dave McKay said in a statement. “As we look towards the completion of our planned HSBC Canada acquisition, we remain
focused on being a trusted advisor to clients through the delivery of new and differentiated banking experiences.”
The bank kept its quarterly dividend unchanged at $1.38 per share.
RBC is the third major Canadian bank to report earnings for the fiscal first quarter. National Bank of Canada also released results [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/articlenational-bank-reports-higher-first-quarter-earnings-beats-estimates/] on Wednesday. Bank of Nova Scotia and Bank of Montreal reported financial results Tuesday
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-scotiabanks-first-quarter-profit-hits-22-billion-even-as-loan-loss/] . Toronto-Dominion Bank and Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce will close out the week on Thursday.
- Stefanie Marotta
National Bank of Canada ( NA-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/NA-T/] ) also gained in the wake of reporting higher first-quarter profit that beat analysts’
estimates [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-national-bank-reports-higher-first-quarter-earnings-beats-estimates/] as a revenue boost in Canadian banking and capital
markets offset higher reserves for loans that could default.
National Bank earned $922-million, or $2.59 per share, in the three months that ended Jan. 31. That compared with $876-million, or $2.47 per share, in the same quarter last year.
On an adjusted basis, the bank said it earned $2.59 per share. That edged out the $2.36 per share analysts expected, according to Refinitiv.
“National Bank delivered strong performance and excellent return on equity for the first quarter of 2024, underpinned by sustained momentum and execution across our business
segments,” National Bank chief executive officer Laurent Ferreira said in a statement. “These results reflect the earnings power of our diversified business mix and relevance of our
defensive posture.”
The bank kept its quarterly dividend unchanged at $1 .06 per share.
In the quarter, National Bank set aside $120-million in provisions for credit losses – the funds banks set aside to cover loans that may default. That was higher than analysts
anticipated, and included $30-million against loans that are still being repaid, based on models that use economic forecasting to predict future losses. In the same quarter last year,
National Bank reserved $86-million.
Total revenue rose 6 per cent in the quarter to $2.71-billion, while expenses increased 4 per cent to $1.45-billion.
Profit from Canadian personal and commercial banking was $339-million, up 4 per cent from a year earlier, driven by growth revenue which were partially offset by higher expenses and
provisions for credit losses.
- Stefanie Marotta
TJ Maxx parent TJX Companies Inc. ( TJX-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/TJX-N/] ) gained ground after it surpassed market expectations for fourthquarter sales on Wednesday as budget-conscious shoppers flocked to the off-price retailer’s stores in search of holiday deals on apparel, cosmetics and home goods.
It also announced a share buyback plan of up to US$2.5-billion in fiscal 2025.
With interest rates still high, discount retailers such as TJX and Ross Stores ( ROST-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/ROST-Q] ) will shine in an
environment of cautious consumer spending, helping them take market share from department stores like Macy’s ( M-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MN/] ) and Nordstrom ( JWN-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/JWN-N/] ), analysts have said.
Still, TJX forecast fiscal 2025 comparable sales growth of 2 per cent to 3 per cent, below expectations for a 3.72-per-cent rise. It expects diluted earnings per share of US$3.94 to
US$4.02, compared with estimates of $4.11.
Net sales for TJX’s core Marmaxx segment in the U.S. grew 5 per cent in the quarter, driven by demand for cosmetics and skincare products. Its HomeGoods segment rose 7 per cent.
“We saw comp sales growth at every division, driven by customer transactions, which underscores our confidence in our ability to gain market share across all of our geographies,”
CEO Ernie Herrman said.
Overall comparable store sales rose 5 per cent, higher than analysts’ expectations of 4.15 per cent, indicating holiday demand remained robust, aided by a healthy inventory.
The company posted net sales of US$16.41-billion for the three months to Feb. 3, compared with analysts’ average estimate of US$16.21-billion, according to LSEG data. Its quarter
earnings per share of US$1.22 came in above estimates of US$1.12.
TJX also intends to raise its quarterly dividend in April by 13 per cent to 37.5 US cents per share.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

177/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

E-commerce platform eBay ( EBAY-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/EBAY-Q/] ) beat market expectations for quarterly revenue and profit on Tuesday,
helped by healthy consumer spending during the holiday season and strength in its focus categories such as refurbished goods and auto parts.
Shares of the company rose around in Wednesday trading.
EBay’s board of directors also authorized an additional US$2-billion share repurchase program.
“We started to see our business improve towards the end of November, particularly in the U.S., driven by consumers looking for value to stretch their limited holiday budgets,” eBay
CFO Stephen Priest said in a post-earnings call.
The upbeat results show that eBay’s marketplace, which serves as a hub for buyers and sellers from around the world, is expected to benefit as consumers loosen budgets and spend
heavily amid an easing economy.
The company reported revenue of US$2.56-billion, beating analysts’ average estimate of US$2.51-billion, according to LSEG data.
It reported adjusted profit per share of US$1.07, compared with an estimate of US$1.03 per share.
However, eBay CEO Jamie Iannone flagged weakness in UK and Germany, saying the latter was experiencing negative e-commerce growth.
The company slashed about 1,000 roles, or an estimated 9 per cent of its workforce last month, joining rival e-commerce giant Amazon and other tech firms as the industry braces for
an uncertain economy.
It expects revenue for the first quarter to be in the range of US$2.50-billion to US$2.54-billion, compared to analysts’ estimate of US$2.54-billion.
The firm also forecast adjusted earnings between US$1.19 per share and US$1.23 per share, above the estimate of US$1.13 per share.
Beyond Meat ( BYND-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BYND-Q/] ) shares soared on Wednesday after the plant-based meat maker placed its bets on
price hikes and steep cost cuts to turn around its battered margins, triggering a squeeze on its highly shorted shares.
About 37.6 per cent of the company’s free float, or shares worth US$172.6-million, were shorted as of Monday, according to data and analytics firm Ortex. Bearish investors have lost
US$93-million on paper since Tuesday’s close.
Beyond Meat was also the second most shorted U.S. stock, as per a report from S&P Global Market Intelligence this week.
The company, which supplies to McDonald’s ( MCD-N [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MCD-N] ) and Yum Brands ( YUM-N
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/yum-n] ), has lost nearly 70 per cent of its market value since its much-hyped IPO in 2019 as sentiment around plant-based
meat took a beating due to higher prices amid sticky inflation.
Beyond Meat reported a 7.8-per-cent decline in fourth quarter net revenue to US$73.7-million, but that was better than the US$66.7-million analysts had expected.
The company also laid out plans to “steeply reduce” operating costs to nurse back its margins bruised by price cuts to make faux meat more appealing to budget-conscious U.S.
consumers.
It expects 2024 gross margins to be in the mid- to high-teens percentage range, compared to negative 24.1 per cent in 2023.
“The shift to raising prices instead of cutting makes sense because Beyond probably needs to target a smaller set of consumers to succeed,” TD Cowen analysts said in a note.
On the decline
Parkland Corp. ( PKI-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/PKI-T/] ) fell after reporting it earned $86-million in its fourth quarter, up from $69-million a year
earlier, and raised its quarterly dividend by a penny.
The Calgary-based company says earnings per diluted share were 48 cents, up from 39 cents during the same quarter the year before.
Sales and operating revenue was $7.7-billion, down from $8.7-billion a year earlier.
Adjusted earnings were lower in Canada and the U.S., but higher for the international segment.
Parkland increased its quarterly dividend to 35 cents from 34 cents per common share.
The company’s Burnaby, B.C. refinery has been shut down since Jan. 21, 2024 due to an unplanned outage after extreme cold weather and technical issues. Parkland says inspections
and repairs have been completed and it expects to resume normal operations at the refinery in early March.
In a research report released before the bell, ATB Capital Markets analyst Nate Heywood said: “We view the print as neutral. PKI reported adjusted EBITDA of $463-million, a modest
increase from $455-million in Q4/22 and in-line with our estimate of $464-million (consensus: $468-million). Despite the ongoing refinery outage, PKI has left 2024 EBITDA and capex
guidance unchanged at $1.95-$2.05-billion (ATB estimate: $1.98-billion | consensus: $1.96-billion) and $475-million-$525-million (ATBe: $510-million), respectively. At Burnaby, PKI has
now completed necessary repair work and maintenance previously scheduled for February and expects operations to resume in early March. The total outage of 8 weeks is above the
previous 5-6-week expectation . While no EBITDA impact was provided, we previously estimated $45-million, but could track higher based on a historical $8-million-$9-million EBITDA
profile per week; however, PKI is pointing to mitigations from enhanced refining operations, optimized refinery supply and ongoing cost-cutting. The print also included a quarterly
dividend increase to $0.35 (yield: 2.9 per cent) from $0.34, fairly in-line with consensus expectations . The deleveraging initiatives and annual EBITDA growth have supported the
balance sheet with leverage now sitting around 2.8 times at year-end 2023 (YE2022: 3.4 times) and management continues to point to leverage near the low end of its 2-3 times target
by YE2025″
MDA Ltd. ( MDA-T [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MDA-T/] ) declined after it reported a fourth-quarter profit of $13.5-million, up from $8.8-million a year
earlier, as its revenue rose 10 per cent.
The Brampton, Ont.-based robotics and space technology firm says the profit amounted to 11 cents per diluted share for the quarter ended Dec. 31, up from seven cents per diluted
share in the last three months of 2022.
Revenue for the three-month period totalled $205.0-million, up from $186.1-million a year earlier.
On an adjusted basis, MDA says it earned 23 cents per diluted share in its latest quarter, up from an adjusted profit of 18 cents per diluted share a year earlier.
In its outlook for 2024, the company says it expects full year revenue to total between $950-million and $1.05-billion, an estimate that would mean growth of about 25 per cent based on
the midpoint of the guidance compared with its result for 2023.
For the first quarter of 2024, MDA says it expects revenue between $205-million and $215-million.
Bumble ( BMBL-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BMBL-Q/] ) shares slumped on Wednesday after its downbeat quarterly revenue forecast underscored
the need for a revamp of the dating-app experience to attract newer generations seeking companionship.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

178/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The company is also set to eliminate 350 jobs, or about 30 per cent of its workforce, it said on Tuesday, as new CEO Lidiane Jones moves to steer Bumble through sluggish user
spending in an industry she said “hasn’t seen true innovation in several years.”
Bumble announced plans to relaunch its eponymous app and refresh the Premium Plus subscription offering, nearly a month after rival Match Group ( MTCH-Q
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/MTCH-Q/] ) projected January-March revenue below estimates as the Tinder owner updates its apps in a bid to appeal to
Gen Z users and women.
While Match and Bumble have said they are looking to use generative AI , neither have detailed how the technology can drive new features.
“There hasn’t been a lot of innovation in the space since the swipe and that experience likely needs a significant refresh beyond just new pricing tiers or filters in order to drive payer
penetration for a new generation of daters,” BTIG analyst Jake Fuller said in a note.
Analysts also said revenue growth this year could be slower than Bumble expects as product improvements may take time to gain traction among users.
U.S.-listed shares of Baidu ( BIDU-Q [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/stocks/BIDU-Q/] ) slid after it said fourth-quarter revenue rose 6 per cent, helped by gains
from its artificial intelligence applications and a growing advertising business.
For the three months through December, the company reported revenue of 34.95 billion yuan (US$4.92-billion), broadly in line with analysts’ average estimate of 34.97 billion yuan,
according to LSEG data.
The company’s adjusted net income rose by 44 per cent to 7.76 billion yuan, compared with 5.37 billion yuan for the same period a year earlier, beating analysts’ forecasts for 6.32
billion yuan.
As China’s largest internet search engine, Baidu makes the majority of its revenue from advertising. But as China’s economy slows and consumers spend less, Baidu has increasingly
invested in AI. In March last year, it launched its ChatGPT -like ERNIE Bot in bid to capture from the potential of the technology.
The company said ERNIE AI services have already started to contribute to Baidu’s revenues.
“Throughout 2023, we made significant strides in advancing ERNIE and ERNIE Bot, reinventing our products and services, and achieving breakthroughs in monetization.” Co-founder
and CEO Robin Li said in a statement.
For the quarter, its adjusted profit was 21.86 yuan per American Depositary Share (ADS), compared with a profit of 15.25 yuan per share a year earlier.
This exceeded analysts’ average estimate of 17.87 yuan per ADS, according to LSEG.
With files from staff and wires
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Market movers: Stocks seeing action on Wednesday - and why [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-themarket/article-market-movers-stocks-seeing-action-on-wednesday-feb-28-and-why/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240228ek2s0028l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

179/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

40(ish) larger-than-life personalities* who shaped Bay Street over four decades; *and one virus
The Globe and Mail
9694 words
15 January 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Welcome to Report on Business magazine’s 40th year in print . Corporate Canada has undergone some seismic shifts since we launched the inaugural Top 1000 list in June 1984. We
asked ROB contributors past and present to write about some of their favourite stories and the people behind them.
1984
It was a little over 40 years ago that the genteel world of corporate finance in Canada was turned on its head. The great disruptor of the day? The small brokerage firm Gordon Capital
—long scorned by Bay Street’s old boys’ club—and its outsize, impossible-to-ignore captain, Jimmy (the Piranha) Connacher.
The firm’s wildly lucrative creation was the bought deal, in which it would buy all the new stock or debt from an issuer, while assuming all the risk of finding buyers—an innovation that
permanently transformed the way financings got done in Canada.
It also showered Gordon Capital’s tight-knit group of partners with riches and launched a thousand legendary tales of boozing, womanizing and partying to match its reputation for hard
work—from the private butler, Basil, delivering scotch to traders at their desks so they could keep working the phones, to Connacher’s infamous appearance at a Christmas party
wearing nothing but a string of lights, to the time two female secretaries received breast implants as bonuses.
This was the world Report on Business magazine was born into, and in the decades since, the face and pace of Bay Street has changed to an astonishing degree.
To mark the start of ROB’s 40th anniversary year, and to trace the evolution of corporate Canada over that time, we set out to identify the 40 people (and the events and trends they
sparked) that have shaped Bay Street since our first issue rolled off the press—through booms, bubbles and busts, ambition and achievement, disappointment and ruin.
The personalities have certainly changed . After regulators briefly banned Connacher from the investment industry in the early 1990s, Gordon Capital stumbled into obscurity, but its
alumni went on to top jobs across Bay Street.
Other larger-than-life trading giants have overshadowed their own eras, like Lawrence Bloomberg in the 1980s and ‘90s, followed by Mike Wekerle at GMP Securities. Though in
today’s bank-dominated markets, the traits that once defined a star trader, like instinct and bravado, have largely given way to algorithms and high-frequency transactions measured in
nanoseconds.
The world has presented many moments of crisis and opportunity along the way, from war to pestilence to recession, while the very contours of power have shifted technologically,
geographically and politically—events and trends that have made Bay Street what it is today.
– Jason Kirby
War on fees
Dick Thomson
Visiting a stockbroker in the early 1980s was like dropping by a frat club for middle-aged men: wood panelling, leather sofas, sports chatter, and lots of well-dressed brokers dispensing
hot tips and loud jokes.
How did stockbrokers manage to support this non-stop party? Outrageous fees. For a typical investor, the commission for either buying or selling a stock was around 2.5% of the
order’s value. Think about that for a second: You had to make 5% on your investment just to break even.
In many ways, the story of Bay Street over the past 40 years has been the story of how that cozy world of fat fees and backslapping bonhomie has been replaced by a new regime of
low-fee, mass-produced financial products. The initial impetus came from the U.S., where institutional investors had long objected to stockbrokers’ lush commissions. The NYSE finally
agreed to abolish fixed minimums in the mid-1970s. Suddenly, brokers had to do what was once unimaginable: compete on price.
In 1983, Ontario followed suit and deregulated brokerage commissions. The following year, TD Bank, then the smallest of the Big Five and led by Dick Thomson (who not only had a
bachelor’s degree but a Harvard MBA—a true rarity in that era), launched a discount brokerage service called Green Line. Customers flocked to take advantage of its bargain prices—
$29.95 a transaction, regardless of volume. By 1987, Green Line had attracted more than 100,000 clients.
When Ottawa passed legislation that allowed Canadian banks, trust companies and insurers to acquire investment dealers, the banks sought to build new empires in the investing
business. They wanted to keep the full-service brokers’ traditional clientele of wealthy families, but they saw even greater potential in expanding their discount brokerages and other
mass-market products to cater to a middle-class clientele—and that meant pushing fees relentlessly lower.
The public enjoys a much better, much more transparent deal these days. Newbie investors can open accounts at a discount broker, and in a few seconds buy a superbly diversified
portfolio of global stocks and bonds. And they can comfortably count on holding that indexed portfolio for years while paying an all-in cost barely above zero.
The downside? Nobody goes to visit their stockbroker any more, which means you have to go elsewhere for your hot tips and sports chatter. Bay Street isn’t nearly as colourful or as
personal as it was 40 years ago. It is, however, a much better deal.
– Ian McGugan
Buyout king
Gerry Schwartz
Schwartz, whose name is invariably preceded by the moniker “buyout king,” pioneered the leverage takeover deal in Canada in the 1980s, building the private equity firm Onex into a
$7-billion company through scores of acquisitions—most recently, the high-profile deal for WestJet in 2019.
As Edward Greenspon wrote in “The Acquisitor” in October 1987: “Since setting up shop in Toronto four years ago, Gerry Schwartz has come to be regarded as one of the ablest of a
new generation of Canadian business people. ...He believes that good performance depends on genuine participation—a belief rooted in pragmatism, not egalitarianism.”
Black Monday
Panicked investors

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

180/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Well before the market opened on Oct. 19, 1987, the tension was thick on the floor of the NYSE. The trading days leading into the weekend were disconcerting. After a five-year bull
run, the inevitable correction had arrived. Overseas markets were in a panic. Selling pressure was building. As soon as the opening bell sounded, the crash was underway. Waves of
sell orders sent stock prices into freefall, which in turn triggered computerized trading programs to generate more sell orders, compounding the losses. By the close of trading, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average was down by 22.6%—a record single-day toll that stands to this day.
What became known as Black Monday represented a new kind of market meltdown, with global markets crashing more or less in unison. Recognizing that financial liquidity, rather than
economic stress, was at the core of the problem, the Federal Reserve injected billions of dollars into the financial system by buying up Treasuries. This essentially remains the policy
playbook today, written when Black Monday set the precedent for the modern global financial crisis.
– Tim Shufelt
Big spender
Robert Campeau
From penniless Northern Ontarian to Ottawa real estate tycoon to U.S. retail financier, Campeau’s ambition and appetite for debt propelled his rise during the 1980s to departmentstore kingpin, briefly controlling chains like Bloomingdale’s after spending US$10 billion on acquisitions. When reality hit, his empire collapsed. As Arthur Johnson wrote in his May 1990
profile: “He was unpredictable, often saying one thing and doing the opposite.
Then there were the interesting personal bits—the face lifts, the hair transplants, the nervous breakdowns after business setbacks in Canada, the psychiatrist who sat on the board...the
terrible feuds and lawsuits with two of his oldest children. These things made a lot of people nervous. But Campeau had also made more than a few people rich.”
Brokerage bonanza
Michael Wilson
Canada’s financial sector during the “greed is good” era looked a whole lot different. The banks stored and lent money; investment banks were independent shops that advised on
mergers and traded stocks and bonds. That all changed at the tail end of the Reaganomics era starting in the U.K. with Margaret Thatcher lifting the ban on U.K. lenders getting into
the investment banking business. It wasn’t long before the Big Bank CEOs here in Canada were knocking frantically on federal finance minister Michael Wilson’s door, begging for the
same leave.
In 1987, Wilson delivered, and within a year many of the best-known indie investment banks were gobbled up. Bank of Montreal moved first, snapping up Nesbitt Thomson. It was
followed by Royal Bank buying Dominion Securities, Scotiabank acquiring McLeod Young Weir, and so on. (The sole holdout was TD Bank, which built its own brokerage in-house.)
The indies feared it would put an end to their cowboy way of life—not to mention restrict them from personally investing in companies they did business with. (“Conflict of interest” was
not a thing at the Gordon Capitals of Bay Street.) But that wave of consolidation arguably made it easier for some of them to survive Black Monday and the nasty recession of the early
‘90s.
For those that did or came later—including Canaccord Capital, FirstEnergy and GMP Securities—the next few commodity booms were glorious. The real demise started after the 2008
global financial crisis, following one last rager, when China’s stimulus money sent commodity prices soaring.
Now, as the banks expand their capital markets and wealth management businesses, fears are growing that they’ll abuse their dominance. (Indeed, the Ontario Securities Commission
fined RBC just $1.1 million for paying some advisers a better commission to sell the bank’s own funds between 2011 and 2016.) The independents still kicking around complain that the
watchdogs ought to do more. But it’s complicated. Those added revenue streams make the banks more stable in times of crisis. And if the past 15 years have taught us anything, it’s
that Earth-shattering crises are now a regular occurrence.
– Tim Kiladze
Canadian Tire feud
The Billes Clan
Stan Beck, the chairman of the Ontario Securities Commission at the time, drily referred to it as “the OSC’s very own Christmas pageant.” In September 1986, the inner workings of
Canadian Tire had been revealed as a cross between a Dickens novel and a WWF cage match. The beloved and tidily managed chain of automotive hardware stores that tracked the
rise of the car and suburbia in Canada, and made millionaires out of many of its stock-owning employees and nearly all its dealers, was a mess.
The smackdown starred the previously invisible Billes clan—co-founder A.J. Billes (the model for Sandy McTire, the thrifty Scot depicted on Canadian Tire “money”), his hothead son
Fred (who owned the flagship store in downtown Toronto) and his coolly eccentric sister Martha. They were suddenly slugging it out in public, sometimes even physically. Martha, Fred
and their brother David had inherited (much to A.J.’s later regret) a majority of the company’s dual-class voting shares, which gave them 60% control with only 4% of the company’s
equity. Fred and Martha each felt they ought to be running the operation and hated the thought of the other anywhere near the controls. Martha accused Fred of being fat and alcoholic,
while Fred accused Martha of being a ditz and a cheapskate.
Fed up at last, the siblings decided to sell their shares to Canadian Tire’s network of dealers, who were no match for the small, exclusive club of bamboozling Bay Street securities
lawyers (29 in all) who descended on the deal like a flock of well-dressed vultures. The transaction turned on the legalistic interpretation of a single sentence that required any change
in majority ownership to profit non-voting shareholders as well as the family. The ensuing pre-Christmas OSC hearing made and broke dozens of reputations, humiliated the dealers as
bumpkins and rubes, cracked the Billes family in two, demolished the company’s reputation as a well-managed paragon, and resulted in Stan Beck blocking the deal as “a flagrant
abuse of the marketplace.”
That didn’t stop Fred and David from later selling their shares. (Martha stayed on as a board member.) Nor did the legal ruling eliminate dual-class shares, still commonly used to
protect hereditary wealth against the enrichment of the many. “It’s better than Dynasty,” one of the lawyers noted at the time. But what the whole sad fracas really resembled was
Dogpatch.
– Ian Brown
Plus four other famous family feuds...
The Irwins (1999) In a bid to move away from family control, George Irwin canned a trio of relatives, then abruptly resigned soon after. A year later Irwin Toy was sold to a private
investment group; 18 months after that, it declared bankruptcy.
The McCains (2004) Harrison McCain ousted his little brother Wallace over who’d succeed them as CEO. Wallace and son Michael went on to buy Maple Leaf Foods, while a nonfamily CEO was installed at McCain, against Harrison’s wishes.
The Stronachs (2020) Magna founder Frank filed suit against his daughter Belinda and her kids, alleging she’d mismanaged his fortune.
The Rogers family (2021) This internecine battle pitted Edward Rogers against his mother and two sisters, split the board, and led the ouster of CEO Joe Natale and the replacement of
the majority of its independent directors—all in the midst of its $20-billion takeover of Shaw.
Comeback Queen

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

181/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Veronika Hirsch
It’s hard to believe now, but when Fidelity Investments lured away then 41-year-old fund manager Veronika Hirsch from AGF—which over 10 short months had invested roughly $2
million to make her a household name—the move was “greeted with the type of fanfare one associates with million-dollar sports trades,” Anne Kingston wrote in her November 1996
cover story. “It was the third item on that evening’s CTV National News . She was referred to as ‘the biggest name in mutual funds.’”
Just a few months after Hirsch made the jump—and while her face graced that month’s issue of ROB—her career exploded over a personal trade in a junior mining company. By the
time she appeared on ROB’s cover again, in February 2012, she’d more than redeemed herself—it was our annual Invest Like a Legend issue.
O&Y collapse
Paul Reichmann
Paul Reichmann and his partner/brother Albert were on a roll. Having emigrated to Canada in the early 1950s, the family built a decorative tile business that spawned a property
development company called Olympia & York. Under the two brothers, O&Y went on a gravity-defying ride. The family built downtown Toronto’s First Canadian Place in 1975, the
biggest office structure in Canada. It pulled off the “deal of the century” in 1977 by scooping up a parcel of buildings in lower Manhattan amid the dysfunction of a destitute New York. It
erected that city’s World Financial Center in 1980.
Looking beyond North America, it was a natural partner for Margaret Thatcher, whose transformation of Canary Wharf in London came with promised financial incentives, including a
rail connection.
But by the late 1980s, the global property market had crashed. Thatcher could not deliver the crucial transit link when expected. O&Y’s banks had enough. In March 1992, O&Y
plunged into bankruptcy, at that time the biggest corporate failure in Canadian history. Canary Wharf would be completed by others.
Paul Reichmann scrambled to win back control of his baby but lost it again, writing a finale to his epic career.
In time, Canary Wharf would flourish as the new centre of financial power in London. Major banks flocked to the site, confirming the vision of Thatcher and Reichmann, who both died in
2013. Yet even today, it is a barometer of its times, its future now clouded by Brexit and remote work. It seems ripe again for a contrarian like Paul Reichmann.
– Gordon Pitts
Trailblazer
Kiki Delaney
Kiki Delaney has the brokerage business in her blood. Her currency-trader dad founded his own firm in Winnipeg, and she got her start as a sales assistant at Merrill Lynch Canada in
1970. A couple of years later, she moved to Toronto to join Guardian Capital as a stock analyst (where, she once told Globe and Mail reporter Jacquie McNish, she compensated for the
“loneliness” she felt as a rare woman in the business by working long hours to uncover undervalued investments).
Gluskin Sheff lured her away as a partner in 1985, and seven years later, she set up her own shop, Delaney Capital Management, where she remains and where her best investment,
as we pointed out in our February 2019 Invest Like a Legend issue, was buying Constellation Software stock at $17—it now trades around $2,780. In 2001, she was elected president
of the elite Ticker Club, a Bay Street club created in 1929 that attracts the cognoscenti of Canada’s money managers with assets under management in the trillions of dollars.
Five memorable Big Bank CEOs
Matthew Barrett, Bank of Montreal, 1989-1999
Canada’s first celebrity banker. He oversaw BMO’s hip “Can a bank change ?” ad campaign, even though he didn’t particularly like it.
W. Edmund Clark, TD Bank, 2002-2014
Ran Canada Trust until TD bought it in 2000, then ran the bank and built it into a retail powerhouse. A staunch Ontario Liberal, he’s still a consummate networker.
Gord Nixon, Royal Bank of Canada, 2001-2014
Chose to grow RBC steadily, rather than make flashy acquisitions. “When a CEO starts talking about his legacy, it’s time to short the stock,” he told Eric Reguly.
Peter Godsoe, Scotiabank, 1993-2003
Traditionally the most international of the Big Five banks and the smallest. When he retired, he boasted, “We’re not only second, we’re the second-largest company in the country.”
John Hunkin, CIBC, 1999-2005
He pushed the bank on to Wall Street and into risky loans to telecom companies and Enron. “I’ve had more difficulties than some,” he conceded. Still, he did double the stock price.
Seagram’s demise
Edgar Bronfman Jr.
For decades, Montreal-based Seagram was a golden company, built by Sam Bronfman (who once famously said, “I don’t get ulcers, I give them”) and family from Prohibition rumrunning to custodians of a glittering portfolio of booze brands like Chivas, VO and Crown Royal. On the first-ever Top 1000 list in 1984, it ranked third in terms of profit, behind only BCE
and Royal Bank of Canada. Sam’s sons Edgar and Charles added a steady cash-earner from a large stake in chemicals icon DuPont.
It all worked until the third generation: designated successor Edgar Jr., a media dilettante who penned pop tunes. He took Seagram boldly into entertainment, making multibillion-dollar
bets on movie production and a record label, while divesting the DuPont cash cow. That made him a natural target for Jean-Marie Messier, a thrusting French conglomerateur
determined to assemble a media-convergence showpiece out of an old-economy water utility.
In June 2000, they concocted a deal in which Messier’s Vivendi would acquire Seagram in a $33-billion all-stock takeover, and then dispose of the legacy drinks business. The
Bronfmans would end up as Vivendi’s largest shareholders; Edgar Jr. would be a star player in the new Vivendi Universal.
Messier went on a spending orgy, loading on more and more debt. Markets soured on his ego-driven grand project. The Bronfmans ousted Messier, but not before he’d frittered away a
large chunk of their wealth.
Today, Seagram is a footnote, its brands split among drinks giants. Vivendi is a nothing-special French media company. Edgar Jr. is a private equity guy in New York.
His uncle Charles described the sad chapter this way: “It was a disaster, it is a disaster, it will be a disaster. It was a family tragedy.”
– Gordon Pitts
TSX transformation

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

182/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Rowland Fleming
The trading floor of the Toronto Stock Exchange was once an eardrum-assaulting gaudy mess of colourfully jacketed floor traders (green for TD, red for Nesbitt Burns and so on)
screaming their trades at one another across the cavernous room.
That all ended on April 23, 1997, when the TSX—under the direction of president Rowland Fleming, who very soon would come under fire for his handling of the Bre-X fiasco—shifted
to an infinitely quieter electronic system, making it the first North American stock exchange to ditch “open outcry” trading. (Fully digital trading had been possible for Toronto brokerages
since 1992.)
The physical trading floor closed almost exactly a year after the TSE adopted decimalization, allowing stocks to rise or fall by increments of a single cent (and, later, by even less than a
cent), replacing the former fractions-based pricing model where the smallest price change was one-eighth of a dollar. The combination of digitization and decimalization paved the way
for the rise of modern practices like high-frequency trading, which became increasingly common as computing power advanced over the following decades. In the early 2000s, a highfrequency trade would still have taken several seconds to execute; by the early 2020s, that had fallen to a few nanoseconds—one-billionth of a second.
– Jameson Berkow
Bre-X bust
John Felderhof & David Walsh
On May 5, 1997, American mining giant Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold issued an announcement that ended weeks of speculation about the fate of Canadian exploration company
Bre-X Minerals. The release confirmed that independent drill tests at Bre-X’s Indonesian gold site showed “no samples that have gold values of economic interest.” Even worse,
Freeport said Bre-X’s own results “resulted in falsification and misrepresentation of many thousands of samples,” leading to “erroneous estimates of gold resources.”
Freeport’s revelations were the final confirmation that Bre-X—headed by Calgary mining promoter David Walsh—was the world’s biggest mining fraud, a brazen salting scheme that
saw employees at the remote Busang site sprinkle gold flakes into drill samples. At their peak in 1996, Bre-X shares were worth $6.2 billion. After Freeport’s announcement, they were
worthless.
Bre-X’s problems had kicked off that March, with the news that site geologist Michael de Guzman had died of an apparent suicide after falling from a helicopter on a return trip to
Busang, where angry Freeport officials were waiting for him to explain puzzling test results. (Conspiracy theories abounded for years, suggesting a badly damaged body recovered in
the jungle may not have been de Guzman’s and that he may still be alive.)
The fallout changed everything for Canada’s mining community, marking the end of an era that had made Canada a mecca for mining companies to raise money with the help of
promoters who touted stocks like carnival buskers.
Canada had no choice but to crack down, recalls Maureen Jensen, a Toronto Stock Exchange executive appointed in 1998 to help draft new disclosure and testing standards for the
mining industry. (She would later serve for four years as head of the Ontario Securities Commission.) In the wake of Bre-X, “no one could raise any money—no one wanted to be
involved with mining companies after that fiasco.”
The task force recommendations focused on new practices for on-site exploration and drilling, stricter rules for reporting findings to shareholders, and required companies to have their
results publicly certified by a licensed engineer or geoscientist with experience analyzing the specific type of resource involved. “So you can’t just have a promoter saying, ‘I found a
million-ounce deposit,’” says Jensen. Other rules took aim at analysts who touted shares while not disclosing that their companies acted as underwriters.
No one was ever convicted for their role in the fraud, a black eye that still haunts Canadian regulators. Walsh died suddenly in 1998 before police and regulatory investigations were
completed. John Felderhof, the Canadian chief geologist who directed on-site work in Indonesia, was accused by the OSC of knowingly issuing false press releases while cashing out
millions of dollars in stock options. He argued he knew nothing of the salting activity and was acquitted in 2007 after a lengthy trial. He died in 2019.
As regulators worked to restore Canada’s reputation, they stressed that their new mining disclosure standards were the strictest in the world, and many of them have since been
adopted in other countries. Bre-X, says Jensen, “had a huge global impact.” Despite the new rules, she says the world could still see a repeat, “but it would require a lot of people—a lot
of people—lying.”
– Janet McFarland
Bay Street killjoys
Paul Martin & Jim Flaherty
In most of the ways that matter, Paul Martin and Jim Flaherty were a study in contrasts as finance ministers. Martin inflicted the most severe spending cuts in decades, while the career
Conservative politician Flaherty embarked on the most epic government spending binge in, well, decades. Yet there’s one role each played that has left an indelible mark on Bay Street:
spoilers to the party.
For Martin, it was the December 1998 decision to kibosh the marriages of RBC to Bank of Montreal, and TD to CIBC, less than a year after the financial giants announced the
megamergers. The result forced Canada’s Big Banks to find other ways to grow—and arguably put the country’s financial sector on firmer ground to survive the global financial crisis a
decade later.
For Flaherty, it was his move in October 2006 to place a tax on income trusts, pulverizing a frenzied trend that saw companies rush to convert themselves to trusts so they could pay
out most of their cash flow to investors and avoid taxation themselves. Retail investors resented the move, as did Bay Street bankers and lawyers who collected fat fees from trust
conversions, but they also disincentivized companies from investing their capital in their own growth.
Two bold moves that in time looked right—even if they weren’t popular.
– JK
Rise of the celebrity economist
Sherry Cooper
A former Fed official, Cooper moved to Canada in 1983 to become chief economist at Burns Fry, then one of the largest indie brokerages in Canada. In 2006—Burns Fry long since
having been swallowed by Bank of Montreal—Cooper, with her knack for making economics accessible and an easy manner in front of the camera, became the second woman to be
named chief economist of a Big Bank. The first was Helen Getter, who was appointed chief economist of TD Bank in 1994.
BlackBerry changes the world
Jim Balsillie & Mike Lazaridis
The BlackBerry quietly debuted 25 years ago, in September 1998, at a conference in Boston. Salespeople from Waterloo’s Research In Motion buzzed around, looking for corporate
warriors with ungainly communications devices strapped to their belts, then pulling out the as-yet-unnamed BlackBerry—the size of a pager, with a monochrome four-line screen and a
tiny keyboard—to show them a better way. The device gave users instant access to email, and it quickly became a must-have for investment bankers, lawyers, CEOs and world
leaders, who interrupted family dinners, graduation ceremonies and deep sleep to broker deals, fend off hostile takeovers and trade in gossip.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

183/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

As Nortel collapsed, RIM became the hottest gadget-maker not just in Canada but in the world. It was even, briefly, Canada’s most valuable company, and it made co-CEOs Mike
Lazaridis and Jim Balsillie billionaires and household names. More than that, RIM transformed its hometown into Canada’s tech hub (sorry, Ottawa) and forever changed the way
human beings communicate. For better or worse, the BlackBerry made all of us always on (the clock) and always connected (to work). It set the stage for Apple and Google to launch
next-generation no-keyboard touchscreen phones that fully connected people to the internet—and turned BlackBerrys into artifacts.
– Sean Silcoff
The women who came this close to becoming the first female Big Bank CEO
Barbara Stymiest: RBC lured the TMX Group CEO in 2004; she was then seen as a successor to Gord Nixon. Instead, she shocked everyone by retiring at the end of 2010.
Laura Dottori-Attanasio: One of CIBC’s top execs left in January 2023 after 14 years to become CEO of Element Fleet Management.
Janice Fukakusa: She spent 31 years at RBC, with a good chunk as chief admin officer and CFO. She retired in 2017 and became the first female chancellor of what was then Ryerson
University.
Joanna Rotenberg: BMO’s head of wealth management left in 2021 to lead Fidelity Investments’ US$4-trillion personal investing division.
Jill Denham: CIBC’s head of retail banking was shuffled out in 2005 as Gerald McCaughey took over as CEO. She went on to serve on several boards and launched her own firm.
Sonia Baxendale: Was president of CIBC Retail Markets until 2011, when the bank rejigged the top ranks. She went on to become CEO of the Global Risk Institute in Financial
Services.
Teri Currie: She spent 35 years at TD, most recently as head of Canadian retail banking, before retiring in 2021. She was succeeded by a man.
Colleen Johnston: Joined TD in 2004 after years in senior roles at Scotiabank and became CFO a year later, a post she held for a decade. She retired in 2018 and sits on many boards.
Rania Llewellyn: The Kuwaiti-born former Scotia exec became the first woman to lead a major chartered bank in Canada, Laurentian, in 2020.
Nortel nightmare
John Roth
Long before there were meme stocks, FANGS and NFTs to whip investors into a frenzy, there was Canada’s most inauspicious contribution to the “irrational exuberance” of the dot-com
and telecom bubble era. Between early 1999 and September 2000, under the direction of CEO John Roth—an electrical engineer who’d joined the company in 1969, back when it was
still known as Northern Electric—investors bid up Nortel’s value nearly six-fold, driven by greed, yes, but also blind optimism in the unlimited demand for internet bandwidth, and with it,
the fibre-optic network gear Nortel made and sold. There’s not been anything like it in scale since. At its peak, Nortel’s market capitalization soared to $360 billion. A generation later,
that’s still more than the market value of Canada’s two largest companies, Royal Bank and TD Bank, combined.
Even if an investor didn’t want to ride the doomed Nortel rocket, many were unwilling stowaways. The company’s staggering valuation gave it an outsized share of the TSE 300 index,
the precursor to today’s S&P/TSX Composite. Nortel alone accounted for more than one-third of the index’s value. That meant passive index investors were heavily exposed to Nortel,
but all too many actively managed funds also loaded up on telecom shares to avoid irate calls from investors.
Nortel wasn’t alone. Shares in any company involved in the network space exploded, including U.S. rivals like Cisco Systems and Lucent Technologies, both of which Roth was
obsessed with outflanking on the innovation, acquisition and market-cap fronts. And more companies rushed to capitalize on the action, with 360networks boasting the largest tech IPO
in Canadian history at the time, in April 2000. (A little over a year later, it would be in bankruptcy protection.)
To some extent, the global telecom bubble was the respectable older sibling to the dot-com bubble, the explosion in investment in speculative internet companies that blended dubious,
profitless business plans with wild growth projections. Even after those loopy dot-coms crashed in March 2000, investors kept bidding up telecom shares like Nortel until the game
ended that September.
It was all downhill from there. By 2002—roughly 65,000 layoffs later—most of that vast Nortel wealth had been wiped out, taking with it the life savings of many investors and Nortel
employees, not to mention the reputations of stock analysts and fund managers who got caught up in the giddy belief that Old Economy rules no longer applied. Roth was ejected in
November 2001, and Nortel limped along under a rotating cast of CEOs before finally being put out of its misery with a bankruptcy filing and mass liquidation of assets in 2009. The
crater in Canada’s tech sector took years to fill.
The irony, of course, is that internet traffic did explode the way Roth and other telecom CEOs promised investors it would, and their massive overinvestment in high-speed networks
paved the way for today’s internet-of-things economy, the metaverse, crypto and artificial intelligence .
– JK
Rise of value
Prem Watsa
Value investing is an inexact science—you try to buy stocks that are underpriced relative to their intrinsic value. But Prem Watsa acolytes often wait years for his Fairfax Financial
Holdings Ltd. to outperform. When we profiled him in 2006, Watsa was under siege from short sellers. But we named him CEO of the year for 2008 after he made $2 billion on wily
trades during the financial crisis, and lately, Fairfax shares have soared to all-time highs.
Convergence mania
Jean Monty & Izzy Asper
Woe be the turn-of-the-millennium media CEO who didn’t have a convergence strategy, the fusion of content— news , movies, TV shows, music—with technology to satisfy insatiable
consumer demand online. This was, after all, several years before social media titans turned everyone into their own content creator, when entertainment gatekeepers still had a lock
on the world’s eyeballs.
In January 2000, dial-up king AOL paid US$165 billion to buy Time Warner, the cable operator and owner of a multitude of entertainment assets. In short order, corporate Canada—led
by Jean Monty and Izzy Asper—joined the chase. Under Monty, BCE acquired CTV and (for a time) The Globe and Mail to create Bell Globemedia. Asper’s Canwest Global,
meanwhile, absorbed the Southam newspaper chain for $3.2 billion.
What was missing was any semblance of a plan for how this was all supposed to work: how to cross-sell ads across disparate platforms and how to even begin paying down the debt
that underpinned those deals.
What followed was the great convergence unwind, the writedowns (AOL, US$54 billion; BCE, $500 million; Canwest, $1 billion), the resignations (Monty from BCE), the bankruptcies
(Canwest in 2009), the asset sales and layoffs.
The repercussions are still being felt. The money-losing Postmedia newspaper chain has slashed newsrooms to the bone as its struggles under a $280-million debt, a legacy of the
Canwest bankruptcy, while BCE, which bought full control of CTV in 2010 for $1.3 billion, recently cut 1,300 jobs and shuttered its foreign bureaus and several radio stations.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

184/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

– JK
Track star
Hunter Harrison
In 2008, we named the delightfully gruff Memphian Hard-Ass of the Year after he turned CN Rail into the best-managed railway in North America. In 2012, he did the same at CP. As he
told Gordon Pitts in this May 2014 cover story: “When you go to a new location, in a railroad or whatever, you’ve got to find the meanest son of a bitch and whip his ass—you get a lot
of attention,” he says. “You take care of the big bully and a lot of things come together.” Harrison died a railroading legend in 2017.
Livent fraud
Garth Drabinsky
In 1999, we learned to pay close attention to the men behind the curtain. For two decades, producer Garth Drabinsky and his finance-whiz sidekick, Myron Gottlieb, had dazzled both
theatregoers and investors. Drabinsky was the loud one, always braying about the next big success. Gottlieb was quiet, happy to tug financial levers in the shadows. They started
together in movies, financing the surprise 1978 hit The Changeling , then launching the Cineplex chain. Drabinsky had vision, turning Cineplex into the fastest-growing exhibition
company on the continent. Gottlieb had sway with the financial backers who could help make it happen. When one of those, the media conglomerate MCA, got tired of the pair’s
overspending in the late 1980s and pushed them out, Drabinsky and Gottlieb turned to live entertainment. The concept gave them the eventual company name: Livent Inc.
Torontonians, blustered Drabinsky, have “an insatiable demand for drama that has not been satisfied over the last 20 years.” The two men acquired control of significant theatres—
buying the Imperial Six Theatre on Yonge Street and restoring it to its former Pantages glory; gaining management control of the North York Performing Arts Centre before it was even
built; block-booking Toronto’s grand Elgin-Winter Garden Theatre for months. Then Livent filled them with long-running productions of, among others, The Phantom of the Opera and
Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat. It financed Kiss of the Spider Woman and took it to Broadway, winning the Tony for Best Musical in 1993. Costly productions of
Showboat and Ragtime followed.
But as Drabinsky and Gottlieb tooled about in chauffeured cars, Livent hemorrhaged money. Eventually auditors pulled back the curtain and found books cooked to the tune of $500
million. By 1999, Livent was bankrupt. Then came a decade of legal proceedings, both civil and criminal, until the two men were each convicted of fraud and forgery. Sentenced initially
to six (Gottlieb) and seven (Drabinsky) years, their time was reduced on appeal. In 2011, they entered a minimum-security federal prison and, two and three years later, respectively,
they were out on full parole. No applause could be heard.
– Trevor Cole
Hollowing out
Gord Nixon
In September 1999, the organization representing the country’s top CEOs sent an urgent memo to Prime Minister Jean Chrétien calling for radical action as more and more domestic
companies were gobbled up by foreign rivals. The missive from what’s now known as the Business Council of Canada pointed the finger at a weak currency, high corporate and
personal taxes and restrictive regulations, and it was the opening salvo in a debate that would consume this country during the first decade of the 21st century as one iconic business
after another disappeared. Shareholders in MacMillan Bloedel, Imasco, Newcourt Capital, Labatt, Seagram, Newbridge Networks and others had sold out to foreign bidders, while
some domestic-based giants that had expanded abroad, such as Nortel, were largely being run from outside Canada.
The trend had accelerated in the years following the 1988 Canada-U.S. free-trade agreement, but its root causes went far deeper than open borders. No factor seemed to contribute
more to the fire sale than our declining currency. When the BCC issued its clarion call, the loonie was hovering around 67 cents (U.S.), down from 90 cents earlier in the decade. In
early 2002, the dollar hit a record low of 61.79.
In May of that year, RBC CEO Gordon Nixon noted in a wave-making speech that no fewer than 62 of Canada’s largest companies, representing 27% of the public float on the TSX 300
index, had disappeared since 2000. More than half had been bought by foreigners. “Foreign investment is important, and open markets are critical, but we should be asking why so
many of our industry leaders are being consolidated rather than doing the consolidating; why we are losing head offices at such an alarming rate; and what is the cost,” Nixon warned.
Nixon’s speech sparked plenty of talk on Bay St. but not much action in Ottawa. The sell-off continued as legendary companies such as Inco, Falconbridge, Dofasco, Alcan, Hudson’s
Bay Co. and Viterra were, within a few years, all swallowed by foreign bidders.
At the turn of the decade, a new kind of predator was prowling corporate Canada: state-owned enterprises, mainly but not exclusively from China. The Canadian dollar had by then hit
parity with the greenback, but that couldn’t deter deep-pocketed SOEs from setting their sights on Canadian resource assets. Ironically, the Harper Conservatives limited SOEs to
minority stakes in domestic resource producers, though after it approved the takeovers of Nexen by China’s CNOOC and Progress Energy by Malaysia’s Petronas.
Before long, “hollowing out” gave way to the “Canadianization” of the oil patch. One by one, foreign-based multinationals began reducing or selling their holdings in Alberta’s oil sands,
in part because of the negative publicity associated with its higher-carbon crude. Domestic players like Suncor, Canadian Natural Resources and Cenovus scooped up the assets that
foreign companies shed.
Indeed, foreign control of the Canadian economy has been declining for a decade. In 2020, it stood at 15.1% of total assets, or $2.2 trillion of the $14.8 trillion in total assets, according
to Statistics Canada. That was down from 19.2% in 2010. Even so, Canada has fallen farther behind the rest of the developed world on productivity and innovation. And our currency is
on the wane again, in spite of aggressive rate hikes by the Bank of Canada as it seeks to quash inflation. Plus ça change …
– Konrad Yakabuski
Fall of a newspaper empire
Conrad Black
It seems quaint now, the idea of building a newspaper empire. And given that Hollinger International reached its peak as the Internet Age dawned, it was arguably a little quaint at the
time. Yet thanks to the combative, self-important Conrad Black, who never smiled if he could sneer, it usually entertained, in the going up and the coming down.
Black established his pattern early: acquire struggling properties and—with the help of close associates—slash costs. In the late ‘70s he maneuvered two widows into giving him control
of Argus, a company partly owned by his deceased father, and shuffled control of the shares to another of his father’s holdings, Hollinger Mines. Buying small papers in big handfuls,
Black created Sterling Newspapers and later transferred those properties to Hollinger. In 1985 he landed a prize—50.5% of the U.K.’s Telegraph. London society, he found, suited
him, and he moved there in 1989. His marriage didn’t withstand the upheaval, and so Black (who for a time penned a column for this magazine) married the Canadian journalist and
photographer magnet Barbara Amiel, who found Black’s growing wealth suited her: “My extravagance knows no bounds.”
By the mid-’90s, Hollinger International was the third-largest newspaper group in the world, with nearly 250 properties, including some of Canada’s Southam chain, most of The
Jerusalem Post and all of The Chicago Sun-Times. It also had massive debt, which failed to quell Black’s ambitions. He craved a national newspaper in Canada, and when he couldn’t
buy one (a bid for The Globe and Mail had failed), he launched The National Post in 1998.
The dream was short-lived. Sinking in debt, Hollinger sold most of its small newspapers and 50% of the Post to CanWest in 2000 for $2.1 billion, and added millions in non-compete
payments, then unloaded the rest of the Post and its debt a year later for $1. Perhaps to salve his wounds, Black applied for a British peerage in 2001 and, when the Canadian
government stood in his way, renounced his Canadian citizenship. He was made Baron Black of Crossharbour, a place that existed only as a station on a London light-rail line.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

185/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

A few years later, U.S. authorities looked closer at those non-compete payments and other Hollinger finagling, and saw crimes. In 2004, the SEC filed civil fraud lawsuits against Black
and his associates. In 2005, criminal charges came, for fraud, racketeering, money laundering and more. When Black tried to remove boxes of documents from his office, a charge of
obstruction was added. In 2007, he was convicted of fraud and obstruction, and sentenced to six and a half years in a Florida prison. He was released in 2012 and immediately shipped
back to Canada by U.S. officials. Novelist Gore Vidal told a Globe writer that he found the whole saga of Lord and Lady Black rather delicious: “The pure treachery with which they did
everything was kind of admirable. They were pure!”
– TC
Oil sands boom
Jim Davidson & Murray Edwards
When small and mid-size oil and gas producers became market darlings in the mid-1990s, Jim Davidson saw the opportunity to establish a Calgary-based boutique energy dealer to
help them raise money for an upcoming drilling and takeover bonanza. Along with Rick Grafton, Brett Wilson and Murray Edwards, he set up FirstEnergy Capital to take advantage
(along with Peters & Co., GMP Capital, Yorkton Securities and Tristone Capital) of the wave of acquisitions, freewheeling spending and rush of deals at the hands of income trusts.
As oil prices surged, deep-pocketed competitors rushed in to do business with domestic producers like Canadian Natural Resources, Encana and Talisman Energy. Big Canadian
banks beefed up their Calgary energy franchises. U.S. and European financial institutions opened branch offices. The corporate world shifted, too: Imperial Oil Ltd., long a fixture of the
Toronto business scene, moved its headquarters out west in 2004. Soon, energy accounted for 30% of the S&P/TSX composite index, neck and neck with financial services.
Now, after the end of the income trust boom, years of weak oil and gas prices, pipeline delays, then a shift in market sentiment to more climate-friendly investment, oil and gas is a
distant second on the index at 17 per cent. Energy companies tap the market for capital far less, and several small dealers have shut their doors in Calgary. For its part, FirstEnergy
has been sold to rivals twice in the past seven years. For Davidson, that does not diminish what he and his colleagues accomplished.
As Davidson says: “We identified the vacuum, and we understood why it was created. The outcome...was a combination of good people identifying an opportunity and then working
their asses off.”
– Jeffrey Jones
Yes, Chef
Mark McEwan
He might hail from Buffalo, N.Y., but no other chef defined the bro-centric, skinny-suit Bay Street culture of the early aughts like Mark McEwan, who opened Bymark at the foot of the
TD towers in 2002, not long after the dot-com bust decimated dealmakers. Bankers went to the tucked-away, starkly masculine “it” spot to drown their sorrows in shots of Rémy and
$33 burgers topped with melted brie, porcinis and black truffle. As deals picked up again, so did the booze-fuelled backslapping—and, COVID-19 notwithstanding, it hasn’t really
stopped since, making Bymark a Bay Street institution.
Trading god
Mike Wekerle
Mike Wekerle rose to fame on the Street as head trader at the legendary First Marathon—founded by trading legend Lawrence Bloomberg—then jumped to Griffiths McBurney and
Partners (GMP), where one of his key deals was the 1997 Research In Motion IPO. As Sinclair Stewart wrote in “Live fast and prosper” (June 2006): “Everyone has a theory as to how
Wekerle pulls it off. Is it his indefatigability, his refusal, at 42, to burn out? His contacts? His memory? His math power?
‘You saw the movie Amadeus?’ asks Seymour Schulich, the wealthy investor and philanthropist. ‘To me, he’s the character in that movie, Mozart. He’s a prodigy. I’ve never seen a guy
who can keep more deals in his head than that guy. I’m not even close. He must have somewhere between 25 and 50 deals in his head at any given time. He’s the best I know.’
Oh, and one other thing, Schulich adds: ‘He’s got the balls of a cat burglar.’”
Wek left GMP in 2011 and, in addition to his personal hijinks, is best known to the new generation for spending 12 seasons slaying entrepreneurs on Dragons’ Den.
Hottest central banker
Mark Carney
Mark Carney was once asked by a waggish reporter what it was like being the George Clooney of central banking. “It’s a very low bar,” Carney shot back.
He’s right. But with a winning smile and a closet full of well-tailored suits, the former Goldman Sachs investment banker brought more than a hint of glamour to the stodgy business of
managing the currency. In 2003, he left high finance for the (slightly less) glittering lights of Ottawa, working first as a deputy governor at the Bank of Canada before moving to the
Department of Finance.
In a world of career bureaucrats, the Wall Street hotshot stood out. He became an advisor to successive finance ministers. And in 2008, he became, at age 42, the second-youngest
governor in the Bank of Canada’s history. Carney quickly found himself piloting the economy through a full-blown financial crisis. He slashed the benchmark interest rate and promised
to keep borrowing costs at rock-bottom for an extended period—a novel technique copied by other central banks.
Canada weathered the crisis better than its peers, winning Carney plaudits and fame. It also brought suitors. In 2012, the British chancellor of the exchequer wooed Carney away from
the Bank of Canada to lead the Bank of England, which economist David Rosenberg likened to Wayne Gretzky being traded from Edmonton to L.A.
After seven years across the pond, Carney is back in Ottawa, working as the head of impact investing at Brookfield Asset Management, and stoking perennial rumours that he has his
eye on one final adornment to his resumé: prime minister.
– Mark Rendell
Shareholder activism
Wes Hall
A consummate outsider who grew up, as he’s fond of recounting, in a tin shack in Jamaica, Hall became the face of the full-combat world of activist investing circa 2011, when he
helped New York hedge fund billionaire Bill Ackman change the regime at CP Rail. “In Canada, if you’re an activist investor leading a shareholder uprising, or you’re the CEO (or
board) under siege, you usually either hire Hall or end up staring at him on the other side of the table,” wrote Doug Steiner in “The fixer” (February 2014). Hall went on to create the
BlackNorth Initiative, whose mission is to end systemic anti-Black racism.
Global financial crisis
Ben Bernanke
Amid a marathon meeting of the U.S. Federal Reserve in December 2008, chairman Ben Bernanke made a confession: “Even I do not know all the acronyms anymore.”

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

186/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The economist, who had been educated at Harvard, taught at Princeton and worked for the White House, had spent the previous year leading the Fed’s response to the real estate
crash and subsequent financial crisis. Despite his intellectual prowess, even Bernanke couldn’t quite keep straight all the credit facilities and “non-traditional” policies making headlines
on a daily basis.
And fair enough. At the time, the only way to fight a crisis heralded by three-letter acronyms (CDO and CDS) seemed to be with four-letter ones (TARP).
The causes of the 2007-2009 financial crisis, or Great Recession, or Global Financial Crisis (GFC, as some on the internet insist on calling it), were simple. Encouraged by low interest
rates and loosening regulations, banks granted risky mortgages. Those loans were bundled together and turned into financial assets. Shaky securities built from wobbly mortgages
became an unsound foundation for the financial sector. When homeowners began defaulting on their loans, it wiped out Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers and nearly $8 trillion in value
on the U.S. markets.
The underlying causes of the crisis are straightforward, but keeping up with the details required learning a new vocabulary. There was the collateralized debt obligation (CDO), the
catchall name for the financial products often built from iffy mortgages. Those CDOs came in a bewildering number of variations, from mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to assetbacked securities (ABS) to collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). And one needed to know the difference between a CDO and a CDS, or credit default swap, a derivative often used to
offset credit risk. Banks thought using a CDS would mitigate the dangers of a CDO, but their overuse contributed to the GFC. Americans uttered a collective OMG, which led to the
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), a US$440-billion bailout of banks and other firms.
Confusion was possible even when acronyms weren’t being flagrantly deployed. The risky loans to homeowners were known as “subprime” mortgages, which suggested a relationship
to the prime interest rate, but instead indicated that their recipients had less-than-ideal credit histories.
The banks and hedge funds may have deployed acronyms and buzzwords to appear clever. As the narrator of The Big Short, a 2015 movie about the crisis says: “Wall Street uses
confusing terms to make you think only they can do what they do. Or, even better, for you to just leave them the f–k alone.” Or the arcane language worked to obscure risk. “It was hard
to take in the fact that CDSs were on the verge of bringing down the entire global financial system when you’d never even heard of them until about two minutes before,” wrote John
Lancaster in The New Yorker. Either way, the public seemed capable of determining what really mattered. The most frequently searched word on the Merriam-Webster website in 2008
was “bailout.” People might not have followed exactly what happened. But they definitely knew what it cost them.
– James Cowan
Busting barriers
Bharat Masrani
Not many Bay Streeters knew Bharat Masrani’s name before he became TD Bank’s new CEO—the first non-white man to rise to the position at one of Canada’s big banks. In his
October 2014 cover story, Tim Kiladze wrote: “TD...is betting that the man who blew Ed Clark away can win over Bay Street too—just give him enough time.” TD is neck and neck with
RBC among Canada’s Big Five banks ranked by assets, and that has required resolute stickhandling. Masrani cut jobs in 2014 and 2015, bought Wall Street’s Cowen Inc. in 2022 and
walked away from a US$13.4-billion deal to buy Memphis-based First Horizon Corp. earlier this year.
The enigma
Tobias Lütke
Every so often, investors get overly excited about a fast-growing company, driving the total value of its outstanding shares to, well, if not the moon, then at least past perennial top dog
RBC and the top of the S&P/TSX Composite Index. Shopify—led by German savant Tobias Lütke, who was our CEO of the Year in 2014, six months before the company’s explosive
IPO—made it to the top in 2020 and stayed there for a year. It then plummeted by more than 80% over 11 months.
Shopify is hardly the first company to fall prey to the RBC curse. Nortel, Barrick Gold, Potash Corp. (now Nutrien), Research In Motion (now BlackBerry) and Valeant Pharmaceuticals
(now Bausch Health) all briefly held the mantle as Canada’s most valuable company before sinking—sometimes disastrously—below RBC. To Lütke’s credit, Shopify remains among
the top handful of companies by market cap on the TSX. And the man himself remains a rare character in the modern-day corporate realm.
As Trevor Cole wrote in his 2014 profile: “Lütke relates to software the way a musician relates to the music he plays. ...Programming comes so easily to him, ‘it’s almost meditative.’ It’s
easy to see how someone so inclined could become a brilliant software engineer. But start a company? ‘I think I probably had to start a company,’ he admits, ‘because I don’t think I can
work for other people.’”
Cannabis craze
Bruce Linton
The day recreational cannabis was legalized—Oct. 17, 2018—was the beginning of the end. Until then, producers’ sky-high valuations were unassailable. Deloitte suggested the
recreational market could be worth as much as $5 billion a year, to start, as startups with little more than a growing licence were ushered onto the stock market by investment banks like
Canaccord and GMP, which reaped millions in fees. Canopy Growth, led by the irrepressible Bruce Linton, quickly became Canada’s largest producer, with a sky-high market valuation
and a $5-billion investment from giant Constellation Brands.
But as soon as Canadians could legally buy pot, the bubble started leaking, and then it burst. Producers had grown way more than they could sell, while longtime users stayed loyal to
their cheaper dealers. Producers grumbled about stringent and costly regulations but hyped the legalization of edibles and beverages in 2019, while looking to pump CBD into every
product imaginable. Stock prices soon tumbled, layoffs ensued, assets were sold. Canopy’s share price peaked two days before legalization in 2018 and has fallen 99% since then.
– Joe Castaldo
The end of the world as we know it
COVID-19 pandemic
When an as-yet-unnamed coronavirus sent all but the most essential workers into lockdown in March 2020, the conventional wisdom was that we’d all be toiling back in our office-tower
cubicles in a few weeks at most.
We were so innocent then! After more than two years of intermittent lockdowns, the world has irrevocably changed —and so has Bay Street, which has lost much of the bustle (but
somehow none of the traffic) of its pre-pandemic days. Nearly 16% of commercial office space in Toronto currently sits empty, and much of modern-day financial history is being written
from basements and kitchen tables. Which means Bay Street is slowly becoming more a state of mind than an actual place.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: 40(ish) larger-than-life personalities* who shaped Bay Street over four decades [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/robmagazine/article-40ish-larger-than-life-personalities-who-shaped-bay-street-over-four/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240115ek1f000jh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

187/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

AI will increase incomes for high-wage earners, but inequality will grow, IMF study warns; It’s not an exaggeration to say that
AI is going to remake the economy and the labour market at a pace that will leave policymakers scrambling to keep up
Linda Nazareth
964 words
4 March 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

In all probability, your job is going to be affected by artificial intelligence . That may sound frightening, but there is an equal split between that impact being a positive one that
enhances your productivity and a negative one that perhaps wipes out your occupation altogether. Those are the startling conclusions from a recent study
[https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2024/01/14/Gen-AI-Artificial-Intelligence-and-the-Future-of-Work-542379?cid=bl-com-SDNEA2024001] by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), which also advises that countries take steps now to increase their odds of winning in the AI revolution .
It is not an exaggeration to say that AI is going to remake the economy and the labour market at a pace that will leave policy-makers scrambling to keep up. From the ethical
considerations to the fact that the new technology can potentially do many jobs better than the humans currently occupying them, the implications are huge. The IMF study takes an
interesting tack in that it looks at the occupational changes and challenges the notion that education alone will be enough to keep workers sheltered from disruption .
There has been a changing narrative regarding the way that tech and education would go together. For a long time, the story was that those with less education would be increasingly
vulnerable as clever robots learned how flip burgers and work assembly lines. More recently, that story has shifted as it has become clear that technology could do a lot more than had
originally been anticipated and could potentially better work done by doctors, lawyers and finance professionals, to name a few and that perhaps that group is even more at risk of
being replaced.
To get a better feel for how it will pan out, the IMF looked at occupations and assessed whether they were likely to be shielded from AI displacement as well as how likely there were to
be complementary with AI. That means taking a wider view than what tasks can be replaced and also putting an ethical spin on things, looking at what tasks we as a society value
having done by humans.
The IMF uses the example of judges, whose work might indeed be highly exposed to AI in that it could sift through mounds of data and come up with recommendations now made by
human beings. That said, they conclude that human judges are very unlikely to be replaced given that society would be unwilling to have judicial rulings to be made solely by AI.
Instead, AI will likely complement the work of judges, making them more productive but not replacing them. On the flip side is the example of clerical workers, whose work may in many
cases be replaced by AI and who will not be saved by societal preferences.
In some cases, the shifts will be driven by need. The IMF sees AI being implemented aggressively to do medical consultations in low-income countries because doctors are in short
supply. It is not hard to imagine that high income countries such as Canada could also make use of AI for consultations in areas where doctors or specialists are scarce and wait times
are long. That in itself brings up questions for the medical establishment as to whether they would like to expand the number of doctors to make sure that AI is not used in isolation.
Rising income disparities as a result of AI adoption are a real concern. The IMF paper points out that in virtually every country they looked at, whether high or low income, the same
groups of workers are set up to lose ground. Workers with more education are likely to be more disrupted by AI (think of those in financial services for example) but are also more likely
to be considered ‘complementary’ with it, which is to say that they are likely to be able to work with it. Women are also more likely to feel the disruption of AI, given that they are
disproportionately employed in sectors that are more likely to see change ahead, but given that they are in both high and low complementary jobs, they will face both more risk and
more opportunities. Older workers, on average, are more vulnerable and younger ones less so.
There is good news for higher-wage earners with the IMF finding that their incomes are likely to rise. That is not good news for wealth inequality, given that it suggests that the gap
between high- and low-income workers is likely to widen. The IMF suggests that this can perhaps be ameliorated by ‘redistributive and other fiscal policies’ which perhaps brings up the
need for more discussions around basic income programs or the like. That might be necessary, but it also underlies the need to rethink the education and training sectors so that
Canada’s labour force is skewed toward having more employment in higher productivity and higher wage sectors.
Getting the most out of AI will be a big task. It will require changes to our regulatory framework to start, but as well it will require everyone – from business to workers to government –
to play a part. Revolutions can lead to social unrest, something that the IMF warns could happen as AI use deepens across industries. There are potentially huge benefits to being on
the right side of the change as well, and having a plan to cope with the disruption is the right starting point.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: AI will increase incomes for high-wage earners, but inequality will grow, IMF study warns
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/careers/management/article-ai-will-increase-incomes-for-high-wage-earners-but-inequality-will/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240304ek340015p

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

188/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Report on Business

Mainframes, the back-end computers supporting everyday life, face a looming crisis
By FARHAZ THOBANI
669 words
17 July 2024
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Ontario
B4
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

President of Kyndryl Canada.
Kyndryl is an international IT infrastructure services provider The mainframe is the original enterprise computing platform. Over its 60-year history, this powerful computer, which
processes and stores large amounts of data, has been the backbone of many of Canada's government services and major financial institutions. Whether you withdraw cash at an ATM,
access Canada's health care system or use your mobile phone, it's a mainframe that quietly, reliably and securely processes the back-end operations that make everyday life possible.
You may not know it, but mainframes are facing a major problem.
Most of today's computer programmers don't know the technology languages that run mainframes. Meanwhile, a generation of mainframe experts is reaching retirement age – and
taking their deep knowledge with them.
It gets worse. Depending on the nature of the data hosted on mainframes, many organizations insist, or laws and regulations require, that such data be stored in Canada and
accessible only by Canadians. So not only are there too few mainframe programmers to go around, there are some practical limitations when it comes to leveraging resources outside
our borders.
Most business leaders are aware of the problem, but many lack the means to address it. According to Kyndryl's latest mainframe study, 90 per cent of organizations plan to continue
running their mission-critical workloads on mainframes for the foreseeable future , but the majority (56 per cent) lament the fact that most people entering the work force do not have
mainframe skills. I have heard from many IT leaders in Canada that it can take months to fill a role.
And with only a handful of Canadian universities offering mainframe-related courses, the talent gap will continue to widen.
The good news is that there are several steps we can take to help ensure both business continuity and innovation at the enterprise and government levels.
A short list would include filling the pipeline of future mainframe talent by expanding postsecondary training in mainframe programming. Academic courses, industry certifications and
mentoring also have the potential to bring new, mid-career and nontraditional workers into the field.
The focus would be on skills, not degrees.
New technologies such as artificial intelligence also have an important role to play. The convergence of AI, mainframe and cloud computing is shaping the evolution of IT. As
mainframe customers embrace the hybrid cloud era, they must modernize to allow integration and deployment of data and applications across multiple platforms. In other words, the
future of enterprise IT will encompass a mix of approaches to computing, with some systems running independently and others in combination to capitalize on the best capabilities of
each. AI will serve as the connective tissue among various types of systems to help process the massive amounts of data required to spot trends, detect cybersecurity threats and turn
“ones and zeroes" into actionable insights.
Embedding various types of AI into mainframe and hybrid cloud environments can also help augment human capabilities and streamline automation of business processes, which can
help take the pressure off when it comes to mainframe skills in the short term, giving tech talent the time to develop those skills. This enables organizations to decrease manual
interventions, process time and software costs.
The AI-driven operational insights can enable more pro-active and predictive management of mainframe systems and provide visibility and control over mainframe performance and
costs.
Developers can also deploy generative AI tools to help write code documentation, increase productivity and modernize or convert classic mainframe code to languages such as
Java and C#.
Solving the mainframe skills shortage isn't simply a challenge for Canada's core infrastructure businesses and government services, it's an imperative. It's important to act now to help
ensure that this trusted and secure technology continues to serve our needs while evolving its capabilities for the challenges of the future .
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GLOB000020240718ek7h00002

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

189/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: Why an AI pioneer is calling for caution; Also in today’s edition: Charting gold’s glimmering outlook
Chris Wilson-Smith
1382 words
25 September 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Last year’s version of James Cameron, the creator of the Terminator franchise, raised alarms [https://www.ctvnews.ca/sci-tech/i-warned-you-guys-in-1984-terminator-filmmaker-jamescameron-says-of-ai-s-risks-to-humanity-1.6484546] over the dangers of artificial intelligence : “I warned you guys in 1984, and you didn’t listen.”
Yesterday’s version of James Cameron might have travelled back in time to stop himself from saying that: In an announcement that he was joining the board of Stability AI
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-titanic-director-james-cameron-joins-stability-ai-board/] , a fast-growing startup that makes a powerful image-generation tool,
Cameron 2.0 said the company will “unlock new ways for artists to tell stories in ways we could have never imagined.”
Maybe both James Camerons would get along – and maybe, more than anyone, they would know when to pull the plug if things get out of hand. To one of the world’s most prominent
thinkers in this space, however, the fact that these decisions are being made by private industry represents an existential threat to humanity. No biggie! More on that below, but first:
In the news
Under the spotlight: Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce reminded us TD isn’t the only bank facing scrutiny [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-cibc-settles-with-usregulators-over-record-keeping-violations/] from U.S. regulators.
Nearing more rate cuts: (Definitely, maybe.) Bank of Canada Governor Tiff Macklem says more trims are coming, stops short of saying when, and sizes up his fight against inflation
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-bocs-macklem-signals-more-rate-cuts-are-coming-but-remains-tightlipped/] : “It has been a long journey.”
Leaving less money down: The federal government’s new mortgage rules will result in a significant decrease in required down payments
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-federal-mortgage-rules-will-significantly-lower-down-payments-on/] .
Happening today
* U.S. reports new home sales for August.
* France reported improved consumer confidence for September.
* Sweden’s Riksbank joined the rate-cut parade. Välkomna!
In focus
What happens when AI gets smarter than us?
Yoshua Bengio is one of the world’s most influential computer scientists. In 2018, he and two colleagues were awarded the Turing Award – a high distinction that is often referred to as
the Nobel Prize of computer science. In 2022, he was the most-cited computer scientist in the world.
For this week’s episode of Machines Like Us [https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/yoshua-bengio-doesnt-think-were-ready-for-superhuman/id1484910273?i=1000670520101] – The
Globe and Mail’s podcast about AI and society – host Taylor Owen sat down with Bengio, who’s now a professor at the University of Montreal and founder of Mila, the Quebec Artificial
Intelligence Institute.
Owen and Bengio spoke about the risks of unchecked advancements in AI and a future with super-intelligent machines. Here’s a part of their conversation:
Owen: I’m wondering what you make of the commercialization of AI in this moment we’re now in.
Bengio: There’s a good side to this commercialization: It can bring benefits of AI to more users and applications. But I find it problematic that all of the advances are happening in
industries that have a profit motive, without the right guardrails. And the people in academia or non-profits typically don’t have the means to push the technology toward more beneficial
applications or less dangerous ones.
Owen: Why should we be scared of human-level intelligence?
Bengio: Well, just imagine that we have entities that are smarter than us. For some reason they have their own goals, which may not be aligned with our goals. It would be like having a
new species on this planet that is smarter than us. In evolution, species that were smarter, like us, have been dominating and often exterminating less smart species. I’m not saying it is
going to happen, but it’s an easy thing to think about.
Owen: Are you worried about some of these runaway risks from governments, too?
Bengio: Not now. Currently, governments don’t have these capabilities. It’s all in the hands of a few private companies. And there is a sense in which it could be safer because
governments tend to be fairly conservative in their actions. But it could also be more dangerous because, of course, a government itself could abuse that power.
Owen: Surely China is a concern here then, and their proximity to industrial development.
Bengio: All authoritarian governments would clearly want to use that for maintaining themselves in power or even gaining worldwide kind of dominance. So there are very complicated
geopolitical questions: How do we avoid these scenarios? But it’s weird because that means we can’t really slow down or stop because we now are concerned that some states with
bad intentions could exploit the technology. So we have to both co-ordinate with China, like maybe sign treaties and be able to verify them, and make sure our companies don’t do
something really stupid.
Owen: Are companies not costing risk effectively? Aren’t there scenarios where a catastrophic failure or harm of AI could kill these companies, too? I mean, the end of humanity isn’t
good for corporate interests.
Bengio: Yes. Let me offer an example. People are more familiar with climate change . Destruction of the climate isn’t good for the CEOs of fossil fuel companies either. But there’s so
much money to be made in the interim. And why would a particular company be the one doing the research to avoid these catastrophes? If they do that, then they’re going to lose
competition against other companies. In pharma, the cost of safety, like all the tests they do to make sure the drugs are not going to harm people, is way above the cost of actually
discovering the drugs in the first place.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

190/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Owen: We have a notion of guardrails, that we as humans are wise enough to put bounds on how technologies can be used. But you’re saying that’s not the case here, that we need a
totally different strategy because guardrails assume we know where this is headed.
Bengio: If we force enough transparency on the companies so that they have to reveal what they’re doing to protect the public and the results of these tests, then they will have a
strong incentive to behave well. The other weapon is liability. So we need to have an adaptive regulatory framework. So, hypothetically, if the companies don’t use reasonable care, and
then something bad happens that’s caused by their system, then they could be sued. And of course, they don’t want to be sued, especially for billions of dollars.
Owen: Should people be scared of this technology?
Bengio: Yes. I am scared. Not the current AI technology , but the one that will exist in some unknown number of years, that is beyond our own intelligence.
This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

📬 Are you seeing AI being used in your workplace? I’d like to hear how that’s going. Also: The Terminator or Terminator 2? Email me: cws@globeandmail.com
[mailto:cws@globeandmail.com]
Charted
Major banks expect gold to extend its record-breaking price rally into 2025 because of a revival in large inflows to exchange-traded funds and expectations of additional interest rate
cuts from prominent central banks around the world, including the U.S. Federal Reserve.
“Strong physical demand from China and central banks supported gold prices over the past two years, but investor flow, and retail-focused ETF builds in particular, continue to hold the
key to a further sustained rally over the upcoming Fed cutting cycle,” analysts at J.P. Morgan said in a note on Monday [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/article-most-banksexpect-golds-bull-run-to-persist-into-2025/] .
Morning markets
Global markets drifted mostly lower [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today1074/] as the rally fuelled by China’s stimulus measures lost steam, and investors again set sights on economic data and future rate moves by the U.S. Federal Reserve. Wall Street
futures were mixed and TSX futures pointed lower.
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was little changed in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 rose 0.36 per cent, Germany’s DAX declined 0.46 per cent and France’s CAC 40
gave back 0.36 per cent.
In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei closed 0.19 per cent lower, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng gained 0.68 per cent.
The Canadian dollar traded at 74.43 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: Why an AI pioneer is calling for caution [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-whyan-ai-pioneer-is-calling-for-caution/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240925ek9p001b9

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

191/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Long Story

Are kids being GAMED?; Millions of Canadian children play Roblox, where they can develop games for fun and profit. A few
of them make a living at it, but most never see a penny
LUC RINALDI
4566 words
20 January 2024
Montreal Gazette
MTLG
Early
B1 / Front
English
Copyright © 2024 Montreal Gazette

Taylor Field-Draper was 11 years old when he came across an online advertisement for a video game called Roblox. "Build anything," it beckoned. Field-Draper, a Lego-loving kid in
Lethbridge, Alta., was intrigued. The game was free, so he created an account under the username Trustmeimrussian and started playing.
It was 2008 and, compared to the era's hottest games - the violent Gears of War, the vulgar Grand Theft Auto - Roblox was relatively juvenile, with bright colours and janky graphics.
Whenever Field-Draper booted it up on his computer, he had access to a never-ending rotation of mini-games, or "experiences," as they're known in Roblox vernacular. There were
thousands upon thousands of them: obstacle courses, dodgeball simulators, Mario knock-offs. In some games, players ran pizza parlours. In others, they built theme parks. The only
thing they had in common was that they were all created by other Roblox users, most of them kids like him.
Soon, Field-Draper began making his own experiences.
Using Roblox Studio, the game's creation suite, he crafted worlds out of digital building blocks. He started with rudimentary structures, then graduated to intricately detailed subway
stations and art deco water-processing plants. Eventually, he was making zombie shoot-em-ups and skateboarding games.
Around the time Field-Draper started playing Roblox, the platform rolled out an in-game currency called Robux. Players could trade real-world money for Robux, which they would then
spend on accessories - shirts, hats and special weapons - for their online avatars or on special powers that fast-tracked their in-game progress. A portion of those Robux would go to
the game's creator. And if a creator accumulated enough Robux, they could cash them back out - about 60 Robux per Canadian dollar. This meant that Field-Draper could, at least in
theory, make a living playing his favourite video game.
The idea excited Field-Draper. His parents, not so much.
"Roblox is not a career," they told him. They encouraged him to pursue more traditional lines of work, so he went to school for carpentry and culinary studies. "But during that time, I'd
stay up at night building on Roblox," he said.
He advertised his services as a Roblox developer on Twitter (now called X), online forums and job boards where creators hire other creators for paid commission work. "At first, it was
just a couple of maps here and there for little developers and it was paying pocket change . But eventually, word started getting out and I got bigger contracts for bigger games."
By 2020, Field-Draper was in his early 20s, working as a chef by day and a Roblox developer by night. When COVID hit, he lost his restaurant job, so he decided to spend more time
on his Roblox side hustle. A few months later, he was offered his biggest gig to date. Musician Lil Nas X, still riding the wave of his megahit Old Town Road, wanted to perform a series
of virtual concerts inside Roblox. The team planning the event asked Field-Draper to help them build it.
Roughly 33 million players attended the Lil Nas X concerts in November 2020, and Field-Draper took home a hefty paycheque. Suddenly, his culinary career seemed a lifetime away.
"I didn't really care to go back to those unstable jobs," he said.
Field-Draper now makes a fulltime living as a producer at Gamefam, a global video game studio that creates maps and mini-games inside Roblox, Fortnite and Minecraft.
He's worked with clients such as the NFL, Sony and the Grammy-winning pop duo the Chainsmokers. His once-doubtful parents, he said, are now "very proud." Not long ago, he used
his Roblox earnings to pay off his mother's credit card.
"I don't say, 'I told you so,'but it does feel really cool." 'EARN SERIOUS CASH'Roblox has made more than a few teens rich. Roblox Corporation, the company that created the game,
has paid out more than $2 billion to its creators over the last five years. The most successful developers earn tens of millions of dollars a year, and even the thousandth-most profitable
creator takes home a respectable US$60,000 annually.
American Andrew Balfanz, who created the ultra-popular Jailbreak experience - a sort of virtual cops and robbers - used his earnings to pay tuition at Duke University. Carleton
University computer science student Alexander Hicks was making so much money on Roblox that he dropped out to start his own video game studio. Roblox Corporation loves to tout
these kinds of success stories in its promotional materials.
Until at least 2021, their website told creators that they could "earn serious cash."
The truth, however, is that it's incredibly difficult to make money on Roblox. Most creators never see a penny. That's because, to cash out, a creator needs to have made 30,000 Robux.
A thousand Robux is about $16, so that means developers need to make nearly $500 - a threshold few developers reach. There are more than 15 million active experiences on Roblox.
Only a small number of them attract a player base substantial enough to earn that many Robux.
"You can have the most fascinating, well-crafted world, but if you don't know how to advertise and communicate with the community, it's going to fail," said Bronson Boualavong, a 26year-old independent Roblox developer in Hamilton, Ont. "There are people who get lucky and end up making a million Robux a month, and they're making more money than their
parents. But that's like winning the lottery."
Boualavong, like Field-Draper, belongs to a new class of online creatives, not unlike the legions of professional YouTubers, the influencers who make their living on Instagram, and the
people who get paid to post TikToks. Like those platforms, Roblox relies primarily on its community of users to create its content. But what sets Roblox apart is that the vast majority of
its users are minors. According to Roblox Corporation, 60 per cent of its 70 million active daily users are under the age of 16.
This has stoked a fierce debate.
Is Roblox teaching young people valuable STEM skills, fostering entrepreneurship and remunerating kids for playing a game they love? Or is Roblox, a company worth US$30 billion,
luring kids with the illusion of riches and leaning on their labour to prop up its bottom line? If you're over the age of 30, you've probably never played (or even heard of) Roblox. But if
you have kids, it's likely part of your daily life. In 2020, Roblox Corporation said that half of American children had tried it, and it's likely that a similar proportion of Canadian kids have
tried it, too. In fact, the company says it combines Canadians and Americans in its demographic statistics.
Roblox is one of the most accessible video games in the world.
Kids can download it for free from app stores on their phones, tablets, computers, Xboxes and PlayStations.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

192/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

The only major console on which it's not available is the Nintendo Switch.
'ROBOT'& 'BL O CKS'Roblox is now older than a good chunk of its users. It was launched in 2006, but its origins stretch back to 1989, when its founder, Canadian-born, Minnesotabred entrepreneur David Baszucki created a technology company called Knowledge Revolution . The firm had an educational focus, and it licensed out its signature software,
Interactive Physics, to schools. In its two-dimensional world, students would simulate cars crashing and buildings collapsing.
"It was astonishing to see what these kids and teens were designing, and I wanted to replicate that capability on a much grander scale," Baszucki has said.
Baszucki sold Knowledge Revolution for roughly $26 million in 1998, and several years later teamed up with his late co-founder Erik Cassel to found what would become Roblox, a
portmanteau of "robot" and "blocks." It was, in simplified terms, a gamified version of his previous software, Interactive Physics. It allowed its players to create - and giddily destroy Lego-like worlds.
And this time, they could do it all online with their friends.
Most video games have a finite shelf life. Players might stick with a blockbuster like Call of Duty or FIFA for a year, maybe two, until developers are forced to release a sequel that
keeps fans coming back. Roblox, meanwhile, kept attracting players with its endless feed of new user-generated experiences. The game grew year after year, becoming available on
more and more devices.
When Roblox Corporation went public on the New York Stock Exchange in 2021, it was briefly worth more than US$40 billion. Forbes estimates that Baszucki, the company's biggest
shareholder, is now worth US$2.9 billion. He lives in the Bay Area with his four kids and his wife, author Jan Ellison Baszucki, who helps him run a philanthropic foundation that has
pumped millions of dollars into mental health and lymphoma research, as well as environmental conservation.
Baszucki's company is bigger than ever, bolstered in large part by the pandemic. When humanity sheltered in place, people went looking for ways to connect online. Adults took to
Zoom; kids flocked to Roblox.
One of those youngsters is Lisa Geimer, an 11-year-old from Markham, Ont. During the lockdowns of 2020 and 2021, she and her schoolmates, unable to hang out in person, would
meet up inside the Roblox experience Adopt Me!, a sort of modern spin on Tamagotchi or Neopets in which players hatch, raise and trade virtual pets.
Lisa's parents, Erin and Peter Geimer, estimate that 70 per cent of the kids in Lisa's Grade 5 class play Roblox. When Lisa attends friends'birthday parties, the most common gifts are
Roblox gift cards, which they can cash in for Robux that get linked to their accounts.
"I honestly love getting Robux," said Lisa, "and my mom knows."
Erin, listening in on our interview, confirmed: "Oh, yeah." As Peter put it, "Lisa knows more about the value of Robux than she does about Canadian currency."
Lisa spends her Robux on upgrades for her pets as well as clothing for her in-game avatars - customizations commonly known as skins. You might wonder why anyone would spend
real money on virtual attire. But in a recent survey of 1,500 Gen Z Roblox players, 56 per cent of respondents said that styling their avatar was more important to them than styling
themselves in real life.
The average Roblox user spends 2.3 hours on the platform every day, meaning that, for many of them, their in-game appearance - more than their real-world look - is how their friends
perceive them. Ryan Solana, a 26-year-old Roblox developer in Toronto, said that players show off their in-game gear in the same way a kid might flaunt a new toy at school.
"There are a lot of players in these games and they're saying to each other, 'I have this gear, I have this weapon, and you don't.'They take pride in it," he said. "It drives their ego." THE
ROBL OX E CONOMY Eighteen per cent of the young Roblox players surveyed were open to spending up to $100 on ingame items per month. That translates into millions upon
millions of dollars. Unsurprisingly, big brands have swooped in to get their piece of the pie. Nike, Netflix, Ralph Lauren, Crocs, Gucci, Mattel, Spin Master, Cirque du Soleil and Chipotle
- among many others - have their own experiences on Roblox.
These branded experiences, like most of the platform's most successful games, bombard children with opportunities to make micro-transactions of $2, $5 or $10 worth of real Canadian
currency. Within seconds of entering the Barbie DreamHouse Tycoon, for example, players are offered the option to spend Robux to unlock new outfits, furniture and decor. In Walmart
Discovered, a shopping cart follows players around as they collect coins, play minigames and buy virtual clothes and beauty products. In Build-a-Bear's experience, you can spend
Robux as you, well, build bears.
For these corporations, Roblox represents a relatively easy way into the lucrative gaming market. They may not have the money or expertise to make a full-fledged, triple-A title, but
they can hire small teams of developers to put together a Roblox experience relatively cheaply and quickly.
There is now an entire ecosystem of studios dedicated to creating Roblox experiences, including Gamefam, the 200-employee company that employs Field-Draper.
Gamefam has created some of the platform's most successful branded experiences, including Sonic Speed Simulator, which has been played more than 840 million times. On offer in
the store's shop: new characters, rare costumes and spins of a roulette wheel that doles out other upgrades and collectibles.
The Roblox economy hinges on the sale and purchase of these virtual vanity items. If an experience doesn't offer in-game purchases, it has no chance of making its creator any money.
Ryan Solana had to come to terms with this fact when he decided to turn his Roblox-building hobby into a full-fledged business venture. Three years ago, while he was studying
software development at Seneca College, he worked part-time as a security guard. To fill the idle hours he spent at his desk, he built experiences on Roblox.
In one of them, Nuclear Bomb Testing Facility, players could either attack or defend an atomic weapons compound. Before long, it had hundreds of regular players.
"And I was like, 'What if these players had more things to buy?'" he said.
By then, Solana had used Roblox for over a decade. He'd played enough to know that the most popular experiences used certain tricks to lure players in: showering them with
intermittent rewards, nudging them to make purchases once they were hooked. "You can kind of see it like a casino," he said. "There are a lot of games that don't provide much value
yet charge a lot."
Solana wanted to make sure users could enjoy playing his game for free, but he allowed them to purchase special privileges within the game. If a player wanted to be a security
supervisor, granting them access to restricted areas and giving them greater social power within the game, they could pay 450 Robux, or about $7. To become the head of the facility,
they'd have to fork out 3,400 Robux - that's $56. Solana knew he could introduce more in-game purchases - and, in the process, make himself more money - but he stopped himself.
He wanted his game to be fun and fair, not a cash grab.
Nonetheless, Nuclear Bomb Testing Facility eventually earned Solana more money than his security job, so he quit and dedicated himself to Roblox full-time. "I was scared at first," he
said. But now he makes so much income that "there are days I wake up, look at my earnings and say, 'Do I really have to work?'" When Roblox creators cash out their Robux for fiat
currency, the company takes a 65 per cent cut. In other words, Solana keeps 35 cents of every dollar his games earn. Reddit and Roblox forums are stuffed with threads criticizing
Roblox for this ratio, pointing out that Steam, another games marketplace, takes only 30 per cent of its developers' revenues.
Solana contends that's an unfair comparison. "A lot of people who argue with the cut Roblox takes don't understand the value of what they're getting on the platform," he said. "Roblox
did a lot of the heavy lifting in terms of SEO, marketing and already having the foundation for my game" - support that Roblox's competitors largely do not provide. "Whether or not the
cut it takes is fair, I guess that's up for debate." SOME ROBL OX DEVEL OPERS ARE KIDS Roblox describes itself as a safe, fun and collaborative space where kids can learn tech
fundamentals. Its website extols the ways the game can teach computer programming, animation and other technical skills. After-school programs like Code Ninjas and Code Wiz use
Roblox Studio as an educational tool.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

193/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

For many families, Roblox delivers these benefits exactly as advertised.
This past summer, a father in Toronto who goes by the Roblox username Dahveedeh - and who asked not to be identified by his full name to protect his children's privacy - teamed up
with his son and daughter, ages 10 and 7, to create a Roblox experience called Crazy Mines. Players navigate an army base riddled with hidden landmines. They used the AI tools
ChatGPT and Midjourney to help them design, code and market the experience.
The family included the same sort of purchasable power-ups found in other games. Crazy Mines didn't make any money, but that was beside the point. "It was more about providing an
educational experience for the kids," said Dahveedeh.
"Hopefully, they're going to remember this when they get older and it's time for them to choose a career."
For kids who venture into Roblox development without adult supervision, the game can be a less forgiving place. Last year, the Guardian reported that Roblox creators had
experienced bullying, financial exploitation and sexual grooming at the hands of their "employers" - that is, other young people who had hired them to help make experiences on the
platform.
And in December, federal police in Australia warned that extremists were using Roblox to recruit children, creating experiences that featured Nazi concentration camps and, in one
case, the recreation of the 2019 terrorist attacks in Christchurch, New Zealand. (Roblox Corporation removed these games.)
Baszucki, Roblox's creator, has said repeatedly that safety is central to his platform. The company has thousands of moderators who review flagged content and escalate incidents of
inappropriate or illegal behaviour. Parents can also access a tool box of safety controls that bar their children from accessing certain types of experiences, making in-game purchases
and using the game's chat functions.
Yet proper payment remains a stubborn issue on the platform. The job board on Roblox's website is full of postings offering subpar wages. While some jobs can net a creator $750 in
real-world currency, others promise 200 Robux - the equivalent of little more than $3 - or a percentage of whatever the game might make, which, in most cases, is no money at all.
Each of the Roblox developers interviewed for this article also had stories of completing commissioned work without being paid. One creator was out a few hundred dollars; another
was stiffed $20,000. "That was the biggest struggle I found working as an independent freelancer," said Field-Draper. "A lot of the time, you're working with younger people, and they
might not have the income to actually give you proper payment. There's no way to enforce them actually paying you."
Lauren Freeman, Roblox's head of developer advocacy, said that fraudulent financial incidents such as these are rare, and that Roblox provides contract templates and shares other
resources with developers about best business practices. "We believe that sharing information is valuable," she said. Ultimately, she suggested that creators would police themselves.
"The community is tight. If you're a bad actor, you will be called out. There's not a lot of tolerance for that behaviour in the community."
In essence, Roblox approaches its relationship with developers much like Uber treats its drivers: it benefits from their labour but does not recognize them as employees, allowing the
company to evade responsibility when things go wrong.
The difference, of course, is that Uber drivers are adults, while many Roblox developers are not.
This presents an odd problem.
In Canada, children are not permitted to work until they're 13 to 16 (depending on the province, and with some exceptions). Given kids are not supposed to be working, there are few
formal avenues for them to fight back if they feel they're being exploited while completing paid tasks on Roblox.
"The question of whether or not it's possible to do labour organizing with children productively is a really bizarre question," Ty Underwood, an associate professor of game design at
Lake Washington Institute of Technology, told the YouTube channel People Make Games as part of a 2021 investigation into Roblox. "It's a very weird and scary situation."
Vass Bednar, the executive director of McMaster University's Master of Public Policy in Digital Society program, suggested that policymakers could play a role in determining how
Roblox engages with underage developers. Should the company be allowed to extract profits from content created by an 11-year-old? What duty should the company have to its
creators when they get scammed? Should the company be permitted to pay kids in Robux and then dictate how many Robux they need to cash out in real dollars? Bednar suspects
that governments have so far failed to answer these questions, in part because they simply don't understand Roblox.
It's kids entertainment, which falls lower on the list of regulatory priorities than, say, Netflix or Facebook.
"We've always been slower or weaker on policy dealing with kids," said Bednar. The platform's success, she added, can obscure the harms it may be inflicting on children. "The
company and the game are successful, which connotes positivity and safety - like, why would kids play something if it exploited them?" The question of how to regulate Roblox has
implications for not only the game and its players but also the future of the digital world at large. In addressing the plight of underage Roblox developers, policymakers may also have
to grapple with the ways other underage online creators - such as social media influencers and Twitch streamers - are compensated for their work. Roblox is also an early example of a
metaverse, and future virtual worlds may well adopt its financial model if there are no laws stopping them.
"There's a big risk in terms of establishing a norm around digital labour not being compensated or valued," said Bednar. "We don't want play to be a side hustle."
In many ways, Roblox is the empowering educational tool it claims to be. Millions of children have logged in, learned valuable skills, socialized with friends and, in some cases, even
made a bit of money. But it's also true that Roblox is blurring the line between work and play. Left unchecked, there may soon be no distinction at all. WHERE THE NEXT
GENERATION WILL BE In early November, Taylor Field-Draper was sitting in his home office, which is lined with funky wallpaper and littered with pop-culture figurines. A row of lava
lamps oozed behind him. Wearing orange-tinted shades and a gaming headset, he talked about the freedom and the stability his career afforded him. He gets a paycheque every two
weeks, but he decides when to grind and when to relax. "The amount of freedom you get working from home making your own schedule, it's phenomenal." This, it seemed, was the life
he'd dreamt of since he was a teenager.
What does Field-Draper want the world to understand about Roblox and its growing community of full-and part-time developers? "A lot of media focused on Roblox - it's almost to scare
parents, like, 'Your kid's gonna get exploited,'" he said. "I've never felt exploited on the platform. I like Roblox. That's why I stayed up all night, hustling and making a name for myself,
getting exposure and building my portfolio."
Roblox, he said, provided him opportunities he might have otherwise never have had. Before he started making a living on the platform, he'd never left Canada. But when he started
working for Gamefam, they flew him down to their head office in Los Angeles. He has presented at international gaming conferences, spoken to university students in Shanghai and
worked with titans of the industry such as Epic Games, the creators of Fortnite - all without ever studying computer science or game design. "These cool opportunities that I never
thought I'd have arose from being a Roblox developer.
It's opened a lot of doors."
Field-Draper gushed enthusiastically about the future of Roblox.
"It's only going up from here," he said. "It's where the current generation is - and where the next generation, and probably the four generations after that, are going to be."
That, he said, is going to create a lot of roles for talented young creators: 3D modelling, coding, scripting, animating and all the ancillary services that video game studios need.
Still, he was sober about the realities of turning Roblox into a full-time career. "Just don't get your hopes up," he advised. "If you come in expecting to make a bunch of money or get
famous, it doesn't always work out. There's a lot of people, myself included, who have made game after game after game that failed."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

194/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

PETER J. THOMPSON / Lisa Geimer, an 11-year-old from Markham, Ont., started meeting up with classmates on Roblox during the pandemic lockdowns and is an avid player.; MIKE DREW / Taylor
Field-Draper, in his home office in Lethbridge, Alta. His Roblox side hustle transitioned to a full-time job during the pandemic.; ROBLOX / A Roblox concert for Grammy-winning pop duo, the
Chainsmokers.; PHOTOS: PETER J. THOMPSON / Lisa Geimer, 11, spends Robux on upgrades for her virtual pets and clothing - or "skins" - for her avatars.; / Big brands that offer Roblox experiences
include: Nike Netflix Ralph Lauren Crocs Gucci Mattel Spin Master Cirque du Soleil Chipotle Walmart Build-a-Bear; / Some argue Roblox is teaching young people valuable STEM skills.; PHOTOS:
ROBLOX / Avatars dance in a Roblox experience.; PETER J. THOMPSON / Lisa Geimer, an 11-year-old from Markham, Ont., started meeting up with classmates on Roblox during the pandemic
lockdowns and is an avid player. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I001.jpg]; MIKE DREW / Taylor Field-Draper, in his home office in Lethbridge, Alta. His Roblox side hustle transitioned to a full-time job
during the pandemic. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I002.jpg]; ROBLOX / A Roblox concert for Grammy-winning pop duo, the Chainsmokers. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I003.jpg]; PHOTOS:
PETER J. THOMPSON / Lisa Geimer, 11, spends Robux on upgrades for her virtual pets and clothing - or "skins" - for her avatars. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I004.jpg]; /
[MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I005.jpg]; / [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I006.jpg]; / [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I007.jpg]; / [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I008.jpg]; / Big brands that offer
Roblox experiences include: Nike Netflix Ralph Lauren Crocs Gucci Mattel Spin Master Cirque du Soleil Chipotle Walmart Build-a-Bear [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I009.jpg]; / Some argue Roblox
is teaching young people valuable STEM skills. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I010.jpg]; PHOTOS: ROBLOX / Avatars dance in a Roblox experience. [MTGZ_20240120_Early_B1_01_I011.jpg];
Postmedia Network Inc.
Document MTLG000020240120ek1k0000v

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

195/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Business

Business Brief: Nvidia’s into nation building. We cool with that? Also in today’s edition: RBC and National Bank are up to bat
Chris Wilson-Smith
1253 words
28 August 2024
The Globe and Mail (Breaking News)
GMBN
English
©2024 The Globe and Mail Inc. All Rights Reserved.

If one analyst catches Nvidia chief executive Jensen Huang so much as sneezing tomorrow, I’d stay away from market news for a few days. Below, as investors sharpen their knives in
case the AI giant reports merely terrific earnings, we look at why Nvidia’s long-term growth could be damaging in unexpected ways.
Up top
Earnings up: Royal Bank of Canada has surpassed [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-royal-bank-of-canadas-profit-rises-on-capital-markets-strength/] analysts’ estimates
for quarterly profit as it set aside a smaller than expected sum to protect itself against losses on bad loans.
And up again: National Bank of Canada also has posted profits [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-national-bank-reports-third-quarter-profit-rise-beats-estimates/] that
exceeded analysts expectations , a week ahead of a key vote on its proposed $5-billion takeover of rival Canadian Western Bank.
Stare down: Buyers smell blood in the water as distressed commercial properties are put up for sale. But so far, sellers of that troubled real estate are refusing
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-distressed-real-estate-sales-rise-but-often-potential-buyers-find-the/] to accept rock-bottom values.
Chair down: The inaugural chair of the organization in charge of overseeing Canada’s adoption of international sustainability reporting standards has stepped down
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-inaugural-chair-of-the-canadian-sustainability-standards-board-steps/] , prompting a search for a replacement at a key time in its duties.
Deep down: A court battle pitting the two brothers behind Dye & Durham Ltd. against one another has exposed [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-dye-durham-lawsuitreveals-broad-investor-discontent-including-2023/] broad discontent among institutional shareholders toward the real-estate software company dating to well before activists launched
campaigns against it this year.
In focus
Nvidia’s new vertical: Nation building
Nvidia’s chief executive is known for a few sayings and stylistic choices: We are at the beginning of “a new industrial revolution ” powered by artificial intelligence . His company’s
relatively affordable products are “democratizing” access to its computational powers. He has a cool leather jacket [https://www.tomshardware.com/tech-industry/nvidia-ceo-jensen-huangdebuts-new-lizard-embossed-leather-jacket-also-says-something-about-ai-gpus] .
Of late, he seems focused on another vision for the future : “Sovereign AI.”
That would be the idea that each nation produces artificial intelligence using its own infrastructure, data, work force and business networks.
Canada is among [https://www.pm.gc.ca/en/news/news-releases/2024/04/07/securing-canadas-ai] the subscribers to this idea, and the argument is similar to the one made by
manufacturers of, say, electric vehicles [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-brief-a-tax-on-teslas/] : If we don’t protect our industry, if we don’t develop and
innovate, we are then beholden to the whims of industry giants in other countries. We lose homegrown winners and jobs, and possibly expose ourselves to security threats.
It’s a great idea for Jensen Huang, who gets to sell billions of dollars worth of chips to governments. But it’s a little more complicated – and possibly even more dangerous – than he makes
it out to be.
The biggest problem might have been best illustrated by Huang himself. At the World Governments Summit in Dubai this February, he reminded an audience
[https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/world-governments-summit/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20first%20thing%20that%20I,for%20one%20innovation%20after%20another.] of leaders across
industry and politics that investment in AI infrastructure is essential.
He then told these leaders, who were gathered in a country that criminalizes being gay, what he would do if he were a leader of a developing nation: “The first thing that I would do, of
course, is I would codify the language, the data of your culture into your own large language model.”
Did leaders of authoritarian nations lean forward in their seats?
That possibility is one of many concerns held by critics of sovereign AI. They argue embracing the concept, especially with the support of a global AI leader, could legitimize and accelerate
state programs that codify belief systems, language preferences, behaviours. And if every nation becomes responsible for its own AI innovations, some of those breakthroughs could be left
trapped behind geographic borders. That’s not to mention the risk of fuelling an already dominant Nvidia into a force that could squeeze out competition completely.
How does all this square with “democratizing” access to artificial intelligence ? And more to Huang’s point: are there lines he wouldn’t feel comfortable seeing crossed?
In July, the Digital Forensic Research Lab outlined ways [https://dfrlab.org/2024/07/17/the-sovereigntytrap/#:~:text=Moreover%2C%20the%20legitimacy%20that%20comes,of%20homegrown%20large%20language%20models.] authoritarian governments that embrace sovereign AI could
use it to further erode human rights.
At a more basic level, the report says, state-backed data initiatives for sovereign AI are likely to hurt marginalized populations, given governments’ views on national identity tend to be
rooted in more deeply held – if not completely fixed – ideas. The report points to China, which has already succeeded in censoring models that threaten Beijing’s messaging. But the
warning applies to any nation embracing the concept.
Canada, which has an “AI Sovereign Compute Strategy” as part of a broader set of measures, seems attuned to these risks. As part of its efforts to spur the development of Canadianowned and located AI infrastructure, it launched consultations with businesses, developers, researchers and Indigenous groups that end on Sept. 6.
We’ll be curious to see what these consultations find, and how they will reflect Canada’s “culture.” (Not that the country has ever struggled to define what that is, of course.)
Huang’s own remarks suggest his strategy is to form the building blocks of the next industrial revolution , then leave it to his client countries to decide how to use them.
Today, even the slightest hint of weakness in Nvidia’s forecast could make for volatile trading over the coming weeks – but most analysts don’t see much of a threat to the AI giant. Longerterm, though, Nvidia’s expansion might attract more scrutiny to its growing role – whether it acknowledges it or not – as a nation builder with no apparent code of its own.
Charted

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

196/197

5/27/25, 10:26 PM

Factiva

Reliance on the low-wage stream of the temporary foreign work program has shot up since 2022. The federal government agreed to ease access to the program in response to calls from
restaurant owners and other employers who said they were struggling to find staff after months of pandemic restrictions. Ottawa announced this week plans to cut
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-federal-government-planning-sharp-cut-to-low-wage-stream-of-temporary/] the low-wage stream back to prepandemic levels amid
criticism of its growing use by Canadian employers.
The outlook
Today: Nvidia and CrowdStrike report after close, assuming no faulty software updates [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-crowdstrike-global-it-outage-microsoft-live-updates/]
. Investors will be chewing over reports from RBC and National Bank of Canada as they wait for ...
Tomorrow: ... Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce earnings, which will be the last of the Big Six this quarter. Other earnings include Dell Technologies Inc., Dollar General Corp., and
Lululemon Athletica Inc.
Friday: Canadian Western Bank reports as it awaits approval to be purchased by National Bank. Canada reports monthly GDP growth, and the U.S. releases two indicators of consumer
spending and price growth.
Long arms of the claw: Inadequate federal enforcement of the lobster fishery in southwestern Nova Scotia is emboldening organized crime
[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-nova-scotia-minister-says-organized-crime-involved-in-lobster-fishery/] that is “terrorizing” the local community.
Morning markets
Global markets held steady [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/investing/markets/inside-the-market/article-before-the-bell-what-every-canadian-investor-needs-to-know-today-1055/] as
investors stayed on the sidelines ahead of Nvidia’s earnings release after the closing bell. Wall Street futures and TSX futures were little changed .
Overseas, the pan-European STOXX 600 was up 0.49 per cent in morning trading. Britain’s FTSE 100 slipped 0.14 per cent, Germany’s DAX rose 0.78 per cent and France’s CAC 40
gained 0.49 per cent.
In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei closed 0.22 per cent higher, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng dropped 1.02 per cent.
The Canadian dollar traded at 74.27 U.S. cents.
Follow this link to view this story on globeandmail.com: Business Brief: Nvidia’s into nation building. We cool with that? [https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-business-briefnvidias-into-nation-building-we-cool-with-that/]
The Globe and Mail
The Globe and Mail Inc.
Document GMBN000020240828ek8s001gt
Search Summary
Text

((journalism OR news OR newspaper* OR "news media" OR "print" OR journalist*)) AND ("generative AI" OR "artificial intelligence" OR "AI tools" OR ChatGPT OR "large language models" OR
"AI technology" OR "machine learning") AND (future* OR change* OR prediction* OR expectation* OR disruption OR revolution)

Date

01/01/2024 to 31/12/2024

Source

The Globe and Mail - All sources Or Montreal Gazette Or The Toronto Star

Author

All Authors

Company

All Companies

Subject

All Subjects

Industry

All Industries

Region

All Regions

Language

All Languages

Results
Found

738

Timestamp

28 May 2025 2:25 GMT
© 2025 Factiva, Inc. All rights reserved.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

197/197

