5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva


Book Review


Who's winning the Internet wars? FREE-FOR-ALL: The Struggle for Dominance on the Digital Frontier THE INTERNET
CHALLENGE TO TELEVISION DIGITAL McLUHAN: A Guide to the Information Millennium Recent Related Reading
SHARON AIRHEART
2119 words
31 July 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D13
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

A few years ago, Ray Smith, then CEO of Bell Atlantic, confidently predicted that we would soon be answering our televisions and watching our telephones.
He was poised to merge Bell Atlantic, the largest of the "baby Bells" created at the break-up of AT & T, with Tele-Communications Inc. (TCI), John Malone's Colorado-based cable
television giant. The $33-billion merger would create a company with wires into the homes of 40 per cent of the U.S. population. No stranger to hyperbole himself, Malone had, the year
before, revitalized the cable industry with his prediction of a "500-channel universe."
Ultimately, Malone was a disappointed suitor. Smith called off the merger the day after the U.S. Federal Communications Commission ordered cable companies to roll back their rates
for the second time in six months.
Six years later, we limp along with 50 or so channels, we don't answer our televisions and -- some would say mercifully -- we don't watch each other over the telephone.
It was, in more ways than one, just a pipe dream. But as Matthew Fraser, who tells this story in Free-for-All: The Struggle for Dominance on the Digital Frontier, makes clear, it is not
that technology failed to deliver on its promise. Rather, communications infrastructure industries, our information pipelines, were in crisis, leading them to make promises that couldn't
be kept. Eager for new visions of their own, governments in both the United States and Canada made champions of desperate opportunists facing a revolution in communi- cations.
Cable companies, with their high debt-to-equity ratios, were threatened by satellite TV. Television networks looked out at audience shares gutted by the cable channels. Telephone
companies, once barred in both Canada and the United States from offering cable services, were playing catch-up as new policies favouring "convergence" finally opened the field. The
players took visionary postures while struggling to seize control of the so-called information highway.
Fraser, a professor at Toronto's Ryerson Polytechnic University, says: "In the free-for-all race to cash in on the communications revolution , technological promise and public
expectations were frustrated by ambition, greed, paranoia, opportunism and muddle. In short, human folly."
Free-for-All deftly shows us the Canadian and U.S. face of that "folly" -- Smith, Malone, Ted Rogers, Ted Turner, Al Gore, Keith Spicer, Bill Gates, Steve Case. With the storytelling skills
of a mystery novelist, Fraser introduces us to these colourful characters and exposes the path from the first U.S. cable system in 1948 -- designed to bring television to the residents of
Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania, deprived by the Poconos from receiving over-the-air television -- to the current "wait-and-see" situation surrounding the much-hyped "high definition TV."
But while broadcasters hope HDTV will put television networks on the same playing field as cable, computer and telephone industries, another force has quietly hijacked the information
highway. "In the end . . . it wasn't the cable barons or the telephone monopolies who put in place the digital infrastructure of the Information Age. The electronic highways of the
future were being built elsewhere on the World Wide Web . The explosion of the Web has had a profound impact on the media and entertainment industries and the old players in the
cable, telephone, movie, music and publishing industries are now frantically racing to catch up."
The Internet -- Fraser styles it "the Book of Apocalypse" in the communications revolution -- has "turned all existing paradigms upside down." In the old world, "smart" networks fed
"dumb" terminals in your home, your television and telephone. In the new world, the Internet is a dumb network that connects smart terminals. Smart networks, having limited
capacities, had to be regulated. The Internet has, theoretically, unlimited capacity. Smart networks are geographically defined assets. The Internet is non-territorial. Traditional
network systems, Fraser explains, have been closed, controlled and regulated. The Internet is an open-architecture system that defies control and facilitates pluralism. Perhaps that is
why it is so popular. In 1998, more than 100 million people around the world surfed the Web. It is predicted that four million Canadian households -- fully half the penetration of cable
television -- will be online by the time we toast the new millennium. Scarcely a decade after the Web emerged, a billion people will be online .
Fraser brings home how quickly the Web has become pervasive and powerful. It took radio 40 years to reach 50 million households. It took television 13 years. The Web reached the
same number of households in four years. That penetration has shifted consumer habits. While newspapers have suffered least with the advent of the Web -- 11 per cent of
Americans reported they read fewer newspapers as a result of being online -- television has suffered most; 78 per cent of those surveyed report they spend less time watching
television due to time spent on the Internet . Rob Glaser, who brought radio to the Internet with RealAudio technology, predicts that people will routinely spend 10 to 15 hours a week
"experiencing audiovisual information" over the Internet . Fraser predicts that, although broadcast, cable and satellite television will continue to exist, the underlying consumer
mechanism for delivering choice will be Internet -based. "There is no competition."
Fraser's sure hand falters only when he considers the future of the Internet . Asking, in essence, what the Internet will be when it grows up, he briefly speculates as to whether it will
be a home movie theatre or a telephone or a television or all of the above.
With a mere nod to media guru Nicholas Negroponte's vision of human-computer interfacing, Fraser attempts to confine the future of the Internet and its World Wide Web to the
paradigms of "old media." Those of us already frustrated by having too many different devices performing communications at much-too-slow speeds would have preferred a little more
discourse on the Negroponte notion of technological jewellery connecting us to the World Wide Web via satellite. Fraser leaves us with the big questions.
The digital revolution , he says, has produced a serious crisis of legitimacy for governments which have "failed to assert themselves meaningfully" in a market-driven, transnational
technological and commercial explosion. We must consider what happens to a world where people are citizens by association, not geography.
As for Canada's "time-honoured linkage between technology and nationalism," Fraser recommends a divorce. This "dubious marriage," he says, has succeeded chiefly in serving
powerful monopoly interests. "In the future , cultural nationalism can no longer be a mere front for commercial opportunism. Canadian cultural policy must focus cultural production on
software, not hardware; on content, not carriage."
The Internet Challenge to Television,by U.S. economist and author Bruce Owen, is less an unravelling of how we got here from there than a manual for accountants. Or perhaps,
more fairly, a probably not-bad primer, complete with diagrams, charts, tables, a glossary and more, for those who wish to compare television and the Internet , consider the
possibilities of convergence while expecting to find the Internet so far lacking.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

1/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Also examining the digital phenomenon is Digital McLuhan,by Paul Levinson, an Internet educator, visiting professor of communications at Fordham University and writer of both
non-fiction (The Soft Edge) and science fiction. Levin- son's dual purpose here is to present the ideas of Marshall McLuhan about the media and their impact on our lives, and to offer
his own ideas about how McLuhan's ideas can help us make sense of the digital age. If you choose to read this book, you will come away knowing that Levinson knew McLuhan,
walked with him, rode in cars with him, ate with him, talked to him on the telephone and that this relationship may have been the sine qua non experience of Levinson's intellectual life.
And why not? McLuhan interests most media theorists, most writers and media types, including me and pretty well everyone else who owns a television set. To paraphrase one of the
scores of Web sites that invoke McLuhan, I personally owe McLuhan a great intellectual debt. I get most of my best ideas by misinterpreting his theories. That being said, Digital
McLuhan drove me to the dictionary to try to work out whether the word "sycophantic" can legitimately be applied when the object is dead.
Millions of words have been written about McLuhan. Lest we forget, the man himself wrote dozens of books. You don't have to just read about McLuhan. You can actually read
McLuhan. Acolytes report a "revival" of interest in McLuhan's theories, mainly because, although he died in 1980, he is seen by some as the patron saint of the digital age. That may
be because of his penchant for, as Levinson correctly reminds us, "exploration over explanation, for demonstration via metaphor rather than logical argument, and his presentation of
ideas about media in small packets, often as few as several paragraphs." This is, after all, the way content on the most important phenomenon of the digital age, the Web, works best.
Or it may just be because, having tired of the introspective nature of the last half of this century, in which all we talked about was what was going on inside our own heads, we're all now
much more interested in the latest intellectual fad: the media. Good-bye Freud and Jung, hello McLuhan and Innis. Digital McLuhan isn't rigorous or balanced. On the other hand, it
isn't boring or overly dense, things you cannot say about a lot of books about media theory. Sharon Airhart is a Toronto-based writer specializing in technology. Related Web Sites
TCI:
Matthew Fraser:
CRTC: http:// www .crtc.gc.ca/ [http://www.crtc.gc.ca/]
Canada's Information Highway Advisory Council:
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/ih01015e.html
McLuhan Program in Culture and Technology, University of Toronto: http:// www .mcluhan.utoronto.ca/ [http://www.mcluhan.utoronto.ca/]
MIT (Nicholas Negroponte): http:// www .media.mit.edu/ [http://www.media.mit.edu.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/]
Net Benefit: Guaranteed Electronic Markets: The Ultimate Potential of Online Trade, by Wingham Rowan, St. Martin's, 240 pages, $52
. Rowan, the host of Britain's long-running TV series cyber.cafe, has been researching the use of electonic markets all through the 1990s. Here he examines where such markets could
go if they were underpinned and guaranteed by governments. This visionary book uses global currency trading as an example, and posits marketplaces in which people could trade
work, accommodations, transport and countless other transactions.
Cracking the Gender Code: Who Rules the Wired World?, by Melanie Stewart Millar, Second Story, 229 pages, $19.95
. It is often said that equality will rule in the wired world. Stewart Millar, a Canadian scholar and frequent speaker on digital issues, examines the articles and images of Wired
magazine in detail to investigate the ways traditional forms of sexism and racism are being transferred into the digital world, eroding the gains of feminism.
Wired Life: Who are We in the Digital Age?, by Charles Jonscher, Bantam, 294 pages, $27.95
. Jonscher is a British academic who these days splits his time between London, where he runs the investment firm Central Europe Trust Co., and Harvard, where he works with the
university's Program on Information Resources Policy. In Wired LIfe, he takes issue with those who say that the deep-seated effects of the technological revolution are inevitable and
even desirable, pointing out (among other things) that the best information processing device on the planet always has been and will long continue to be the human brain.
The Sun, the Genome and the Internet : Tools of Scientific Revolutions, by Freeman J. Dyson, New York Public Library/Oxford, 124 pages, $32.95
. U.S. physicist and writer Dyson (Disturbing the Universe, Infinite in All Directions, Weapons and Hope, etc.) argues that technological changes have always altered humankind's
ethical and social arrangements, and that such new technologies as genetic engineering and worldwide communication have the potential to create a more equal distribution of the
world's wealth. This is a a discourse on the ethical uses of science and a reinterpretation of the scientific process, as well as a challenge to use these new technologies to narrow,
rather than widen, the gap between rich and poor.
Document glob000020010827dv7v013mg

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

2/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

CONTEXT

Chipping away at life as we know it --- TV is the monster in the living room --- Rewired --- Technology has transformed 20th
century life, and we're only beginning to understand the implications --- Canada's century --- In The Star's continuing series
to mark the new millennium, business reporter Robert Cribb tracks how the telephone, radio, television and the computer
changed Canadian society in the last 100 years.
Robert Cribb
6699 words
29 August 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

On paper, we have more free time today than a century ago. The 52 hours a week we worked on average in 1900 has fallen to about 38 today. Problem is, there's often very little
leisurely about our leisure time. Increasingly, we spend off-work hours checking voice and E-mail messages, researching on the Internet and answering pages. Even on holidays, we
stay connected. A recent America Online study found 47 per cent of subscribers take their laptops on vacation and 26 per cent check their E-mail.
In 1954, a CBC study of how a community reacts when television is introduced chose Halifax, which was about to get television signals. The results: 12 per cent of Haligonians
surveyed reported attending five or more movies each week prior to the arrival of television; after TV arrived, the figure dropped to less than 1 per cent. Radio listening dropped to 3.2
hours a week from a pre-television average of 12 hours. And while more than half of Haligonians attended local sporting events before television, the figure dropped to 35 per cent by
1958.
In the telephone's early days, Quebec operator Dorothy Kerr connected in more ways than one when she put through a collect call to a Canada Packers office. "To the gentleman who
answered me, I said, `I have a collect call here for anyone here, will you accept the charges?' He answered me very abruptly, `No, let him pay his own call.' As a rule, I never answer
back to my subscribers, but he was a little too strong and I said, `You are a poor sport.' So he answered, `Let me take you out tonight, and I will prove that I am not.' So I turned to the
operator next to me and she said, `Go ahead, you have nothing to lose.' So I accepted and from that day to the day he died (I married him about a year after) we were very happy."
I
N THE beginning was time and space.
And we, sprinkled across regions and countries, waited for the word.
But smoke signals, carrier pigeons, canoes, horses and messages corked inside bottles were no match for the vastness of continents and oceans. However rich in meaning or idea, the
message was stifled by the medium.
And while bridging the communication gap became one of the technological obsessions of our age, its implications were never truly anticipated. When we invented ways to access a
world of information in a blink of an eye, we reinvented ourselves.
None of this was imaginable in 1900, when communication was still intensely local. In place of a radio, computer, television and cassette deck, your only living-room entertainment
appliance, if you had one at all, was a parlour piano.
Devices that carried words or images across continents were still science fiction gibberish. It would be 20 years before you got a telephone or radio and half a century before your eyes
would survey a televised image.
Even if you lived in a city, your media world consisted of a daily newspaper carrying weeks-old stories on "the mysteries of the telephone system" and the Klondike gold rush. In the
absence of Canadian newswire services, foreign news reached you through American eyes.
Your universe was intimate, growing increasingly vague and distant as you peered beyond home. You were firmly rooted, shaped by your sense of place.
Fast forward 100 years to a fully digitized, information-saturated society where breaking news in Bangkok reaches us in seconds, national borders are disintegrating, and phone calls
and messages follow us around the globe.
Computers the size of entire rooms have shrunk to palm-sized devices reminiscent of Star Trek communicators. Envelopes and stamps seem antiquated next to instant communication
tools that beep and vibrate. Data traffic has surpassed voice traffic on the nation's telecommunications networks, signalling a fundamental shift in the way we share ideas.
Our expectations , lifestyles, world views, attention spans, levels of social connection, even the way we process information have all been recast. We understand our surroundings,
gender roles and social structures in a kind of sweeping context invisible to earlier generations.
We live in the most connected country in the most connected society in human history, say some. And we're only beginning to understand what that means.
"The ability to communicate instantaneously and cheaply are two of the most dramatic developments in the 20th century," says David Hochfelder, a history of technology researcher at
New Jersey's Rutgers University. "It's changed our sense of time and how quickly things need to be done and expanded our spacial reach to get what we want faster. But it's eroded
our sense of place."
When technology allowed us to hear voices thousands of kilometres away, watch images from across the world and have online conversations with like-minded romantics in Peru with
compatible astrological signs, geography disappeared.
The printing press, invented in 1455, was the first technology to make ideas accessible to a mass audience, but it would take another four centuries for the written word to become
instantly transportable.
While telegraphy emerged as early as 1837, the technology had its coming-out party in 1844, when Samuel Morse sent a message from Washington to Baltimore reading "What Hath
God Wrought," making speedy communication an international phenomenon.
"Time itself is telegraphed out of existence," shouted London's Daily Telegraph.
Religious leaders associated the strange communications device with black magic, an expression of techno-fear that would recur throughout this century's technological evolution understandably, considering the speed of change the telegraph triggered. Faster than any technology up to that point, the telegraph transformed the way humans lived their lives.
It wasn't uncommon for businesspeople to send and receive up to a dozen messages a day, spending as much as $1,000 a year on telegraphy - when $1 was enough to buy a fine
quality man's shirt.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

3/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

In 1903, The Star made history by using wireless telegraphy to report on the Canada's Cup yacht race between the American ship Irondequoit and Canada's Strathcona as it
happened.
"There is a crowd outside the Star office," a news story on the event reported. "A young man writes out the news on the bulletin and the people read it almost before the smoke has
died away. `The Strathcona is slightly ahead,' and almost ere the skipper himself is sure of the lead, up goes the second bulletin, while upon another window the race is being sailed in
miniature and the Union Jack puts out a little ahead of the Stars and Stripes and the people stand by the course and watch as if they actually saw the race."
Confusion and misunderstanding about how messages were magically transported across such great distances inspired public speculation about pieces of paper blown through wires
like peas through a pea shooter and requests from mothers looking to send their far-flung children home-cooked sausage by telegraph.
"It revolutionized business practice, gave rise to new forms of crime and inundated its users with a deluge of information," wrote Tom Standage in his book The Victorian Internet .
"Governments and regulators tried and failed to control the new medium. Attitudes toward everything from news gathering to diplomacy had to be completely rethought."
Guglielmo Marconi successfully established transatlantic wireless telegraphy in 1901, when the letter "S" in Morse code made its way from Poldhu, Cornwall, to Signal Hill in St. John's,
Nfld. But it was Canadian-born Reginald Fessenden who perfected the concept of modern radio when he orchestrated the medium's first broadcast on Christmas Eve, 1906.
Fessenden challenged Marconi's theories on sound transmission. While Marconi visualized radio transmission as a sudden impulse prompted by an electric spark, Fessenden saw
ripples that moved in circles as they surrounded a receiving antenna.
Even though roundly dismissed by minds as great as Thomas Edison, the hot-tempered Fessenden managed to convert radio signals into a frequency that could be amplified and
heard. And when he played "O Holy Night" on his violin for the ears of shipmen of the United Fruit Company in the Caribbean from his transmitting station in Massachusetts, it signalled
the birth of the world's first mass medium.
Montreal-based CFCF became Canada's first radio station in 1919 and Toronto's CFCA broadcast the first radio concert in 1922. "Men and women sang and played into an instrument
on Wallace Ave.," read a newspaper account of the evening bearing the headline Witchcraft Of Radio Telephone Exiled The Gloom Of Stormy Night. "Three miles away, in the
Masonic Hall on Yonge St., 1,100 sat spellbound by their music."
Like the telegraph, radio was a curious device to its early listeners, who were confounded by how sounds from distant places reached them through a small box. "A man in Toronto
speaks quietly into the empty air through a small wooden horn and people in Nova Scotia, in Georgia, in Illinois, hear his voice, hear him breathe, hear the clock ticking on the wall
beside him," gushed a 1922 pamphlet explaining the enigma of radio. "It is an astounding affair - this latest servant of mankind, and it has come so quickly upon the world that its
masters still regard it with a wonderment that borders on distrust."
By 1925, radios were claiming a spot in Canadian living rooms. Families would gather around them at the end of the day to hear music, lectures, religious sermons, sports events,
dramas and interviews. Popular programs became the centrepiece of community events where neighbours gathered to listen. In remote areas, owners of the best radio receiver would
share the signal by placing it near the telephone and rebroadcasting it to neighbours listening in on a party line.
Radio created new kinds of community rather than isolating listeners. "Through it (radio), I have become aware of whole countrysides which before were merely names on a map,"
wrote P. C. Foster, an avid Toronto radio listener at the time. "I am finding out how their people think and feel. I am becoming surprisingly familiar with their little mannerisms of speech
and accent. I hear about their politics, their civic troubles and their national problems. They have become my neighbours. By radio, this world is being drawn together. We feel closer. A
friendly comradeship is developing. We are beginning to know each other, and knowledge destroys prejudice and suspicion, that unholy pair of war makers."
But widespread predictions that radio would usher in world peace were short-lived. The medium that began in wonderment came of age in tragedy. "If you want to ask somebody
about their connection to historical events, what people will tell you about in the whole of the 20th century is where they were when they heard a declaration of war or when (U.S.
president John) Kennedy's assassination was broadcast," says Ernest Dick, a historian of sound and the moving image, and an archivist with the CBC for 10 years until 1996.
"People's connection to history is through radio and television."
The first human drama to play out over airwaves was set in Canada. Nova Scotia's 1936 Moose River gold mine disaster had the continent sitting on edge for days as hundreds of
miners and rescuers tried to save three men - David Robertson, Herman Magill and Alf Scadding - trapped 37 metres below.
What made the event a broadcasting breakthrough was a small microphone dropped into the pit by rescuers, allowing listeners on the surface to hear the words and even the
heartbeats of Robertson and Scadding. (Magill had died soon after the men were located.) "Words cannot describe our relief and our immense joy when . . . a man's voice was heard
perfectly clear and distinctly saying, `Hello, hello, do you hear me up there on the surface?' " wrote one rescuer recalling the moment of first contact.
"This one-way telephone setup, consisting of a tiny transmitter in the underground cavern and the amplifier and receivers on the surface, provided sole and continuous communication
with the entombed men from the time it was set in operation until the rescue of two of the men, 64 hours later."
Every 30 minutes, Canadian radio listeners heard the same opening sentence from announcer J. Frank Willis: "This is the Canadian Radio Commission broadcasting from Moose River
Mine, Halifax County." Nearly 60 radio stations in Canada and another 650 in the U.S. reported every development up until the dramatic moment when Robertson and Scadding
crawled out to the surface. "It was the first event where radio really gained ascendancy over newspapers for that kind of reporting," says Dick.
It was also the birth of the modern shared experience and one of the first intoxicating hints at what was to come: the power of communications technology to connect millions.
Radio's new influence would soon reveal its hold on public opinion. On Halloween Eve, 1938, Orson Welles' War Of The Worlds broadcast, a dramatization of the science fiction novel,
convinced more than a million listeners that Martians, appearing as a strange genetic mix of bear and octopus and brandishing heat rays that rendered human weapons useless, were
truly upon us.
But it would be politicians, not actors, who would take charge of that power. From its early days as a conveyor of comedy routines and classical music, radio became the central tool of
political propaganda. As soldiers stepped on to European battlefields in World War II, a parallel war unfolded over the airwaves.
Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt all became creatures of radio, adept at using the technology to speak to their constituents as parents would talk to
their children, says Paul Levinson, a communications author and teacher.
When Hitler was injured in a 1944 bomb blast, he took to the airwaves that evening to calm an anxious nation, Levinson says. "Many believe just the sound of his voice kept the country
together . . .unfortunately for the Allies."
Roosevelt was one of the first public figures to embrace the power of radio in the 1930s with his "fireside chats," drawing nearly half of the American population to their radios for his
addresses. "Most Americans in the previous 160 years had never seen a president," wrote author David Halberstam. "Now almost all of them were hearing him, in their own homes. It
was literally and figuratively electrifying."
But it was Churchill who earned a reputation as radio's greatest orator for his inspirational, often literary addresses that buoyed the spirits of the British during the darkest days of World
War II. "Only in times like these can nations preserve their freedom," he said in one of his most stirring soliloquies. "But all depends now upon the whole life strength of the British race
in every part of the world and of all our associated people, and of all our well-wishers in every land, doing their utmost night and day, giving all, daring all, enduring all to the utmost, to
the end."
The power of the political radio message was aimed at more than a loyal national audience. Saul Padover, a political intelligence officer in France and Germany during the war, wrote in
1946 about "black listeners" in Germany who "risked liberty or even life" to hear broadcasts beamed from London, New York and Moscow and how those messages undermined Nazi

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

4/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

control at home. "I know Germans who used to get up at 2 o'clock in the morning in order to listen to the BBC," Padover wrote. "I would, indeed, go so far as to say that it did more to
destroy Hitler than any other comparable agency in the world."
GEORGE DUNLOP was only a teen when Alexander Graham Bell transmitted the first telephone call between Brantford and Paris, Ont., in 1876. A telegraph agent in Paris at the time,
Dunlop told The Star in 1946 that he was the first to hear a voice over a long-distance wire as he stood next to Bell that historic day.
"When we were ready for the test, I picked up the receiver, and at first I could only hear a lot of noise and crackling," he recalled. "Then I heard something that sounded like a faint
voice. It seemed to be saying, `Hello. Hello. Hello.' Then I gave the receiver to Mr. Bell."
And when the inaugural telephone conversation was complete, Dunlop said Bell shed tears of joy. "Mr. Bell was the most excited man I have ever seen. He was jumping up and down,
and the tears streamed down his face. He told me: `The telephone is an assured success.' "
It was. But it took decades before Bell's technology would link homes across the country.
"People didn't embrace it because they didn't think they needed it," says Sharon Babaian, a historian with the National Museum of Science and Technology in Ottawa. "They thought
the telegraph was enough and while they thought the telephone was interesting, they didn't know what to do with it. You needed a network. If only a few people had one, who is going to
use it?"
It wasn't until 1916 that transcontinental phone lines linked Montreal with Vancouver. By 1932, a trans-Canada telephone system was complete, linking the country's phones from coast
to coast. The transatlantic hurdle was gradually solved with ocean cables laid between Scotland and Newfoundland in 1956. By the late 1960s, Canadians were able to reach a voice in
any country around the world.
It's a technological innovation that triggered a social transformation, speeding up the pace of life and changing our lifestyles forever.
The telephone created a new professional - the operator - who quickly earned a role as a family friend for many Canadians.
Stories from the 1930s recall the mother who asked the operator to connect her to her son who was somewhere in western Ontario travelling for a soap firm. There are those who
called the operator to settle bets such as the proper spelling of the word "analysis." Operators were also the first to learn of fires or accidents as frantic callers simply screamed into the
phone, often forgetting to leave an address before hanging up.
Hamilton operator E. V. Hannaford recalled her duties in 1908 included giving out football scores. "That was exciting, especially if the score was in favour of the Tigers."
In 1943, a couple married in Montreal used the telephone to transmit the sounds of their nuptuals to the groom's parents in Toronto and the bride's relatives in Collingwood, who
listened to each word spoken into a microphone.
When pay phones began popping up in the 1940s, they introduced telephonic mobility. Pay phone calls quickly reached a peak of one every five minutes in Toronto, especially on
paydays when the machines were flooded with nickels. Dates were made and broken, parties planned, groceries ordered. Long lines of servicemen waiting patiently for a chance to call
their best gal or their mothers were a regular sight.
But even in the midst of that legendary evolution in human connection, the great plague of modern communications emerged: telemarketing. "The telephone canvasser is definitely not
here to stay," predicted a 1933 news story about telephone subscribers having to listem to "some bozo on the other end of the line" selling raffle tickets or dry-cleaning services.
Canadians became the world's most avid users of Bell's technology. By 1934, every man, woman and child in Canada held an average of 214 telephone conversations, a gabbing
record that topped the second-place U.S. figure of 191 calls per person.
Today, there is a telephone in Canada for every 1.6 people. And about 6 million Canadians - or 20 per cent of us - now use a cellphone.
TELEVISION, the most influential medium in history, took its place on the century's cultural stage in the '50s, forging the modern primacy of the image and profoundly affecting every
medium before it.
Unlike the radio and telephone, television had no single inventor, no moment of epiphany when it became an official technological marvel. It used the same basic technology as radio,
receiving signals over electromagnetic waves, but the television was exceedingly more demanding technologically, requiring a host of different inventors, each contributing a piece of
the puzzle.
By 1952, three Canadian Broadcasting Corp. channels - 6, 9 and 11 - had been set aside in the Toronto area. In 1953, Canadians were spending $400,000 a day to join the television
revolution . Toronto was at the centre of that trend, accounting for more than 8,000 sets a month, each selling for an average of $430.
A survey of television's impact on social and home life in southern Ontario at the time found farmers along Lake Erie were getting out of dairy farming because late evenings spent
watching television left them unable to wake up early enough to milk their cows.
The study focused on the Niagara Peninsula town of Waterford, where television signals from Buffalo, Detroit, Chicago and Rochester had been available for three years.
Already, elementary school students were spending up to 20 hours a week in front of the television. And housewives reported that their televisions were devilishly seductive. "I go over
to dust the wretched thing, idly switch it on . . and an hour later, I'm still sitting in front of it," one said.
Unlike radio, which was becoming a kind of soundtrack to daily life, television demanded singular attention. And that meant a change in social habits.
Bridge night, for example, was quickly being replaced by a new form of social gathering: the television evening. And much like bridge night traditions, television parties developed their
own customs.
"During the formal TV evening, strict silence is observed by the guests from 8:30 to the end of the program or midnight, a drink and candy are passed quietly during the evening, and it
is the responsibility of the guest to dispose of them without gulping, sucking or knocking over his glass in the semi-darkness," wrote Mary Joliffe, who did the one-year study. "After the
show, the lights are turned on and food is served. Conversation centres around the program just viewed. Bringing in irrelevant topics smacks of poor taste."
Joliffe also spotted the beginnings of a trend that would come to consume Canadian nationalists as broadcasting signals brought a flood of American content across the border: a
threatened sense of Canadian identity. Children knew the face of every U.S. election candidate better than they knew Canadians and could "learnedly and correctly discuss" the U.S.
election system, she found.
While Canadian television's development was initially designed as a public model - "There will be no privately operated TV stations in Canada, in contrast to the American practice," a
1952 newspaper article declared - the pressures of geography and politics stepped in. With Canadians already engrossed by powerful signals from south of the border, it became
clear that Canadian policy would soon have to mirror the U.S. approach. In January, 1961, the test pattern on Toronto's first private TV station - CFTO - transformed into images that
reached thousands of Ontario homes.
Only four years after its birth in Canada, half of Canadian households had a television set. By 1957, Canadians spent an average of 4.3 hours a day in front of those sets. The figure
was six hours a day within a decade. But by 1972, television viewing dropped to about 23 hours a week, which still holds today.
National television signals blanketed the country by 1960, able to reach a potential audience of more than 14 million people, all but about 2 per cent of Canada's population. It was an
accomplishment that allowed Canadians "to share, in their own living rooms, a community of interest," read a 1958 CBC report, "to participate in the events of national importance."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

5/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Nearly 5 million Canadians watched the Grey Cup together on their televisions, and coverage of the Queen's visit to Ottawa in 1957 was handled by 6,300 CBC employees, the largest
broadcasting team ever assembled to that time.
Marshall McLuhan, the first television theorist and one of Toronto's most famous sons, catapulted to international prominence in the early '60s as a leading voice on the media's impact
on how we act and think. His seminal book, Understanding Media, introduced the now legendary idea that "the medium is the message," a controversial notion that societies are
influenced more by the media used to communicate than by the content of that communication.
At the heart of McLuhan's thesis is a vision of media as an extension of human senses able to shape our perspective and knowledge. And as electronic media such as radio, television,
telephones and computers superseded the written word, McLuhan argued they were transforming society by "moving us out of the age of the visual into the age of the aural and
tactile."
The ability of electronic media to reach us through several senses at once would heighten our awareness and open our minds, he argued, contributing to such social changes as a
revolution in modern art.
"When we extend ourselves into new media, we alter our environment," says Liss Jeffrey, a communications expert with the McLuhan Program in Culture & Technology at the
University of Toronto.
Television, for example, showed its impact on children's learning habits with the birth of the fast-paced children's program Sesame Street in the 1960s. School systems across North
America were forced to change their kindergarten and Grade 1 curriculums in the early '70s to meet the needs of the new post-Sesame Street student.
"If you have an impact on the attention span of young people, which is closely related to learning, you're talking about molding the sensibilities of an entire generation. Television and
computers have more impact in that regard than any formal system of education."
But it wasn't just young people who were changed by the television image. The medium changed our "visual grammar," says Mark Starowicz, head of television documentaries for
the Canadian Broadcasting Corp., who produced a series called Dawn Of The Eye, exploring television's impact on society. "Programs I did 20 years ago I wouldn't do the same way
today because I think the input valves of society have changed . Things have to move quicker, more impressionistic, the editing is faster, music scores are tighter. Most of these old
television programs are dead boring and you wonder why they were so exciting at the time."
Like the biblical tasting of the apple, our eyes were opened to the world with a kind of compelling penetration we've never known before. Sex, violence and foul language all became
elements of television dramas and news programs. The medium became the cultural forum where values were established and mores formed. Hollywood became our teacher of
fashion, language, hip. And watchers across the planet became television's impassioned students.
When strictly controlled state television signals in the former Soviet Union were finally relaxed, viewers behind the Iron Curtain were exposed to California-style rock videos and soap
opera lifestyles that could have only seemed wondrously strange to their eyes. In the emerging 500-channel universe, Israelis rush home to see the latest episode of Ally McBeal. Buffy
The Vampire Slayer is a topic of water cooler discussion in China.
It's cultural clear-cutting without boundaries.
Witness the Harvard researchers who found teenage girls in the Fiji Islands, which only started receiving TV signals in 1995, developing eating disorders after watching Melrose Place.
"Innocence is impossible in the modern age because of access to television," says Paul Rutherford, a history professor at the University of Toronto and expert in the evolution of
technology in Canada. "It destroys the backstage. Everything is exposed and becomes transparent."
ADECADE AGO, in an inconspicuous Geneva physics lab, a little-known researcher wrote a technical paper with the eyelid-drooping title "Information Management: A Proposal." Tim
Berners-Lee handed that 15-page document to his boss who, after reading the series of complex diagrams and ideas, scribbled on it: "vague but exciting."
It was perhaps the greatest understatement of the information age.
Berners-Lee's conception would form the basis of the world's fourth mass medium. The soft-spoken computer guru fashioned a way for computers to share information, allowing
anyone on the globe with the right equipment to receive text, pictures and audio in seconds. We now call it the World Wide Web .
It has transformed the personal computer, first introduced in the '70s, from a modest tool for writing letters and balancing chequebooks into a revolutionary technology that has
profoundly changed the worlds of publishing, commerce, retail sales, education and research.
The first computer, built in 1946, had 18,000 vacuum tubes and weighed 30 tonnes. Despite that huge bulk, it had less power than your pocket calculator. In fact, experts say that, in a
world where microprocessor performance doubles every 18 months, there is more computing power in your personal computer than NASA had to send men to the moon.
And the adoption of computer technology has been as dramatic as its technological evolution. While it took nearly 40 years for radio to reach 50 million households worldwide and 13
years for television to reach that mark, the Internet cracked it in only four years.
The world of business has been revolutionized by technology, with computers transforming the way companies order supplies, maintain records and share information with clients.
The age-old expectations of the market have also been turned upside down. Speculative start-up firms run by 20-somethings with a novel idea had once been dismissed out of hand
by investors. Now they can lure millions of dollars in a couple of days on the stock market.
Information technology has likely created the most dramatic shift of wealth in human history. Microsoft Corp. is worth more than GM, Ford and DaimlerChrysler put together. Yahoo, the
Internet darling with the cool name and hot stock price, has become a $40 billion company in its three years on the stock market.
The wired economy has opened up the world of teleworking and virtual corporations, which replace brick-and-mortar buildings with the flexibility of the where-you-are office. Worldwide,
researchers estimate there are about 180 million people wired to the Internet . A recent Angus Reid Group poll reported 55 per cent of Canadians are connected - up 13 per cent from
September, 1997.
Everything from dating to shopping has changed for the country's most wired. Approximately 20 per cent of Canadian Interneters shop through computer lines, spending an average
of $560 a year, or $1.3 billion over the past year, the report says.
Surveys also show the Net is already drawing our attention away from television. Households with Internet access watch 13 per cent less television on average than those households
that are not online , according to a recent study by Nielsen Media Research. A previous study by Bell Canada's Internet arm, Sympatico, reported 55 per cent of subscribers say they
watch less television and spend an average of 48 hours a month online .
And that shift has an insidious side.
It's now too easy for people to indulge anti-social behaviour, says Steven Stern, a psychology professor at the University of Pittsburgh. "People with latent obsessions who may not go
to an X-rated movie theatre could easily form a habit of watching it in the comfort of their own home. Technology brings maladaptive behaviour closer."
Predictably, the birth of this new mass medium has produced dire predictions . Psychologists have warned about the dangers of " Internet addiction disorder" (IAD), arguing the new
medium has created wide-eyed devotees suffering the same kind of pathological obsession as gamblers, alcoholics and those with eating disorders.
Even without a pathology, most experts agree our info gadgetry, which has always been associated with easing the human condition, is actually cluttering our minds and stressing us
out. Weighed down by pagers, cellphones, hand-held computer organizers and a daily flood of E-mail messages and phone calls, we're both super-connected and super-stressed, say

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

6/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

experts.
We work on several things at once, our brains straining to write a letter as we are checking E-mail and following the plot of the television program turned on in the background.
And while we were designed to think about more than one thing at a time, we're pushing ourselves too far, says Larry Rosen, a psychologist and author of TechnoStress. "As each
technology came in two generations ago, people focused on them, sitting around the radio or television. Today, we don't usually complete tasks before switching to another. We can't
think and work if we're constantly interrupted."
And, Rosen's research shows, all of that brain activity doesn't stop when we do. "We've lost an hour of sleep a night over the last generation and it's actually affecting our physiology.
When we ask people why they wake up so often, it's usually because of some communications they receive in a voice mail or E-mail. They just keep telling themselves, `Don't forget to
do that, don't forget to do that,' and eventually the mind is disturbed enough to pull them out of sleep."
The birth of any major new technology has been accompanied by fear-mongering, but some suggest this time it really is different because the medium is different. Today's technology is
advancing with unprecedented speed, one innovation following breathlessly on the next, leaving us no time to ponder their effects. And unlike its predecessors, the Internet is what
technology author Levinson calls the "medium of media," bringing together text, audio and video in one experience.
"In the long run, the computer is our most profound invention. It transforms all of those media into something different. You become your own programmer. It puts power in people's
hands because with all other media - radio, television, motion pictures - you receive information. Now you can interact with it."
That digital -age ability to customize your media represents the latest revolution in the way we communicate. Think of it as the movement from mass media to personal
communication. And be concerned about its implications, says Steve Jones, head of communications at the University of Illinois in Chicago.
"It means there are fewer and fewer things that bind people in terms of information. I'm dubious about what that means for future generations. So much of what we understand as
democracy is based on the notion of it being mass mediated. Political debates are national debates, thanks to the opportunity to broadcast them. If we no longer have broadcasting as
we know it, can we have national debates? Can we have a body politic?"
The certainty of king, country and class that gave turn-of-the-century Canadians their grounding is the stuff of historical films. In its place, we have a crush of competing marketing
messages that create a simulated world in which we understand ourselves as consumers and little else.
"We are much less secure today than in 1900," says the University of Toronto's Rutherford. "The boundaries around people - such as gender, class, race, ethnicity and age - both
confine and define the individual and make clear your role. With information technology, those borders begin to collapse."
In a media world of 500 TV channels and a growing flood of customized communities on the Internet , the age of the shared experience ushered in by radio and television could be
over.
"For a 15-year period, everybody in the society who was alive when television penetrated saw the same thing, and it was the basis of communal experience and conversation," says
the CBC's Starowicz. `
`This generation will never know that. For the first time in human technological history, as television appears incapable of assembling a majority any more, there appears to be no
technology following it to create a significant quorum."
And there are concerns beyond the social. Computers could actually be changing the way our brains work, according to some observers.
Since the birth of the printing press, humans have emerged in a print -based world where we acquire and absorb information in a linear fashion - for example, from the top left-hand
corner to the bottom right when reading English. Point A leads to B, which in turn brings us to C. Narratives flow from one event to the next.
But today, we are raising the world's first Internet generation in a communications medium that is distinctly non-linear and increasingly non-textual. Hypertext - a method of quickly
moving from one electronic document to another on the Web - can instantly transport readers from the opening lines of an Internet site to contextual background on a different site to
related pictures in yet another location, all with a couple of clicks. We may never make it to the bottom right-hand corner.
"(For adults), a lot of what we see today feels like information overload," says Paul LeBlanc, the 42-year-old president of Vermont-based Marlboro College, a school offering three
different degrees in Internet technologies. "Our grandchildren will not feel that. They have an ease at making meaning from fragments instead of a clearly constructed argument.
They're wired differently."
Living at the end of an electronic umbilical cord has made us all of these things - more knowledgeable, productive, worldly, stressed out and insecure. We've expanded ourselves to the
limits of the horizon, pushed information across boundaries and continents and raised our awareness in a way that could not have been imagined 100 years ago.
But many of us have also undercut ourselves, become subservient to the wires we have strung, less sure of ourselves, less substantial. We have been recreated in the image, not the
word, in marketing symbols rather than personal convictions, in fantasy instead of what makes us unique and authentic.
We would appear remarkable curiosities to the eyes of our time-travelling turn-of-the-century predecessors. They would marvel at our technological brilliance that has linked together a
planet and transformed the lives of millions. But soon enough, once they got to know us, they would surely lament what has been lost.
As they acquainted themselves with our habits, the way we live and think, so profoundly different as to seem almost alien, they might even question whether we are still the same
species. Beneath the skin, beyond the basics, they'd be right to wonder.
NO MISSING LINKS: A rusted circuit board forms a backdrop for inventor Guglielmo Marconi, shown at Signal Hill in St. John's, Nfld., where in 1901 he received the first radio-telegraph message across
the Atlantic. SOUND RAVES: Against a backdrop of vacuum tubes, two stars from 1930s' radio serials - the Spider, left, and the Shadow - skulk from one computer window to another. They know what
evil lurks in the hearts of men. ICONS OF THEIR TIMES: It's the Ricardo living room and Lucille Ball is the star on her very own TV. But who is that moving in on her turf? It's Buffy the Vampire Slayer,
otherwise known as Sarah Michelle Geller. TECHNOLOGY SQUARED: Cubes tumbling out of a laptop and into the uncertain of cyberspace bear the likenesses of Lucy, the radio sleuths and Lara Croft
(top left) who blazed to glory in the Tomb Raider video game series. Marconi watches warily from the screen.
Document tor0000020010830dv8t00v7d

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

7/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

The Net turns 30! --- Even the scientists who linked two far-flung computers together for the first time in 1969 had no idea
they were standing at the threshold of a communications revolution.
K.K. Campbell
2518 words
14 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Quick: What was the greatest scientific achievement of 1969? The Apollo 11 Moon landing? The BBC premiere of Monty Python's Flying Circus?
How about the birth of the Internet ?
In 1969, the great frontier was thought to be outer space. Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the Moon and proclaimed it a "giant leap for mankind." It wasn't so. By 1979, the
space dream was largely moribund - except in the most Californian of enclaves, like the L5 Society. By the '90s, it was reduced to technocratic tedium.
(The Simpsons TV show parodied a televised shuttle launch, with the family leaping in horror for the remote control to change the channel when Tom Brokaw announced an exciting
new mission "to measure the effects of weightlessness on tiny screws.")
The 1969 "giant leap for mankind" wasn't out there. It was in here - inside the wires hooking up computers. Cyberspace.
People have picked many different Internet birthdays. Some peg it to 1973, while others argue the Net wasn't really created until TCP/IP protocols were introduced in 1983. Others
even prefer the advent of the World Wide Web , which didn't come into existence until the early 1990s.
But we like 1969. It was a year of planet-wide upheaval in culture, science and politics - sort of like the Net itself.
At the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), computer-science professor Leonard Kleinrock was working on the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency Network
(ARPANET). On Sept. 2, 1969, his refrigerator-sized Honeywell mini-computer was set-up and ready to talk.
Over at Stanford, Doug Engelbart was playing with his own Honeywell fridge. In October, it was ready to go. According to UCLA log books, grad student Charley Kline probably made
the first contact on either Oct. 20 or Oct. 29, 1969. The Honeywells finally "spoke" across a 50-kilobit-per-second AT&T phone line.
E-mail as we know it didn't exist then, so there's no "first message" to mark the event. On March 10, 1876, Alexander Graham Bell's first words to his assistant over the telephone were,
"Mr. Watson! Come here! I want you!"
Much as Kline might have wanted to allude to that historic moment, he probably wouldn't have typed, "Professor Kleinrock! Come here! I want you!" Instead, he just logged in to
Stanford through something akin to telnet.
There's always been uncertainty as to the exact date. That's because no one working on the baby-Net thought it was a big deal. Certainly not compared to the Moon landing. (Probably
not even compared to Monty Python's parrot sketch.)
Late Net pioneer Jon Postel once noted: "You have to understand the context. Here we were doing this little research project that involved a few computer scientists. There wasn't any
thought that we were exploring this brave new world or inventing it."
The original intention of the "little research project" (ARPANET) was to provide a means for the U.S. government/military to maintain control in the aftermath of a nuclear war with the
Soviets. The Pentagon needed a communications system that could survive.
In 1964, the RAND Corp. came up with the idea of a decentralized system of interacting. The Internet was designed, from day one, to be rugged and difficult to shut down.
In effect, the Net was set up so that if one or more links in the chain were destroyed, the others would remain intact, and communication would still be possible. Messages would merely
be rerouted around the disabled link.
By December, 1969, there were four computers on the network: UCLA, Stanford, University of California Santa Barbara and the University of Utah. Today, there are millions. And 200
million human beings - and probably 700 million in two years time.
Who'd have thought that a Cold War strategy designed to help preserve Western capitalism could evolve into a mass culture medium that's shaking the very foundations - and
threatening to overturn the order - of that society?
People have written, and will continue to write, millions of words about how the Net has changed things. But to me it comes down to four words: "the death of distance."
Human communications advances are about reducing delivery time. It took time to carry messages by foot, but less by horse. Then came the ship, telegraph, airplane, radio and TV,
and satellite. Each time the delivery time dimished.
Now, incredible amounts of information can be sent around the world in an instant via the Internet . We are all closer to each other than we've ever been in history. And that changes
the way the game of life is played. Here's my catalogue of the key changes wrought upon our world.
AMERICAN EMPIRE: The Net has enhanced U.S. cultural dominance. It's not that our friends to the south intended to do that. It's just that so many were online so early. And they
never shut up. More power to them. But, it isn't going to last. Within two or three years, for the first time ever, there'll be more non-English speakers online . However, American
dominance of e-commerce will continue beyond that, as it currently hosts the vast majority of consumer sites.
SUBVERSIVES: Another reason U.S. dominance can't last is because of the nature of the Net: It's subversive. Communications advances in human history have enhanced the value
systems of the owners of the technology - TV, radio, printing presses, mainframe computers. They all centralized power. The Net does the opposite. It gives a "louder voice" to
outsiders.
This is good and bad. Entrepreneurs can out-do big corporations. Toronto's Evelyn Hannon is publisher of JourneyWoman, an online magazine for women travelers. She built a travel
industry brand and readership that's resulted in a spin-off TV show. She outperformed businesses with million-dollar branding budgets.
On the other hand, neo-Nazis and racists know it's better than buying ads in the back of gun and UFO magazines. They are all over the Net and aren't going to be silenced because
most are in the U.S. and the American Supreme Court protects their speech.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

8/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

LOVE: Put people together in any environment and they fall in love. Tens of thousands of couples have found each other online - thousands married. Online environments have
replaced the 1970s and 1980s "singles bars." It's cheaper, more time efficient, and your clothes don't stink of smoke the next morning. Cyberspace also provides women much greater
control and safety in the meeting process.
SEX: For those not interested in flowers, there's still sex. All data transmits faster online - including sexual imagery. Sex material helped create the VCR installed base that made video
an economic alternative for Hollywood. Likewise, sex sites have proven that e-commerce works. People will support it, if they like the product.
Every sexual predilection has a support community online . Unfortunately, that applies also to child pornography. The Net doesn't create more pedophiles, but it does help organize
them and increase the trade - and demand - for kiddie porn. That spurs supply. Recognizing this, a three-day conference about combating it was held in Austria last September and
attended by about 250 people from nations in Europe, North America and Asia.
WORK: It's never been easier to work from home - at least, from a technical angle. The Net was built by workers scattered around Planet Earth. Telecommuting saves overhead and
provides employees with greater access to their homes and families - if they're mature enough to discipline themselves, of course. Unfortunately, it's under-developed because most
businesses don't understand it.
TRADE: E-commerce is finally here - well, not really here, but "down there," at least, in the U.S. Canada is behind for a variety of reasons - the main one being lack of entrepreneurial
spirit. In the U.S., Amazon.com ushered in the mainstream (i.e., non-sex) e-commerce boom. Now that Ontario has its own Amazon - Indigo.ca - maybe it'll catch up with the rest of the
American economy.
E-commerce is already remaking the face of real world retailing, threatening many bricks-and-mortar distribution outlets. For instance, the independent travel agent is dying as virtual
travel agent giants like Expedia move in and airlines lure customers to book direct online . Auto makers want consumers to make shopping decisions online , reducing dealer lots to
test drive and pick-up spots. GM just announced it wants to buy 770 dealerships and turn them into "company stores." These changes will eventually alter how our cities look.
CONSUMER POWER: The Net makes it easy for groups of disparate people to band together, pool their resources and act in concert. Disgruntled consumers, for instance, can find
each other online , create flash protest campaigns and create and distribute "business black lists." When American federal bank regulators wanted banks to monitor individual bank
accounts for signs of money laundering, it received 205,000 direct e-mail comments about the plan - only 50 were positive. It dropped the idea. Consumers have power online
because the seller's competition is always just one click away. The 21st century will be consumer-driven.
PRIVACY: The Net has a virtually inexhaustible capacity to gather bits of information about people, then file it in a searchable database. On the positive side, this can mean superlative
customer service, because your vendor can fully understand your interests. On the negative side, what other businesses have profiles on you? Do you want profiles on your kids?
George Orwell conceived of Big Brother as Big Government; it may come instead from Big Business. Many nations are considering private sector privacy legislation to punish corporate
abusers.
BUSINESS MODELS: The biggest development in the computer industry has been "open source software." Open source is software that allows anyone to see the programming code normally, software is compiled and you can't read the code. This invites innovation from all over the world. The code is "owned" by anyone who wants to work on it. And it scares the
hell out of software giants like Microsoft.
The greatest open source software success story is the entire Internet itself. Software like Sendmail, Apache Web server and the Perl programming language are free for use and are
the guts of most of the Web. Linux is the fastest growing operating system in the world. Fortune 500 companies are now exploring the bottom line advantages of this "socialistic"
business model.
WALL STREET: The Net wires together buyers and sellers who'd never have met, creating instantaneous and sensitive markets. Wall Street is the most visible example. In the early
1960s, institutional stock investors produced a staid arena. Big blocks of securities moved in predictable ways. Critical trading info stayed in exclusive circles. But the Net has brought in
hundreds of thousands of individual traders who don't care for the old rules. "Day traders," fuelled by online chat groups and rumor mills, have made stocks unbelievably volatile.
Expect almost every product in the world to develop its own online market.
COPYRIGHT: The Internet is history's greatest photocopier. The international copyright system is under attack on all fronts. Publishers of books, news and music are chasing down
"copyright pirates" - raiding homes and seizing computers. And writers are suing newspapers for redistributing their works in cyberspace without permission.
NEWS : Early on, "visionaries" predicted the Net heralded the death of traditional news organizations. It's the opposite. Deluged by data, people seem to need trusted editorial filters
more than ever. "Big brand" news outlets are trying to cash-in on their names. Studies show that consumers value brands when "distance shopping" - which is what online
consumption is, including news consumption. The Wall Street Journal is successful. Regional papers without strong local news are exposed as ad-driven wire service paste-up
sheets. They won't succeed.
Niche publications are booming - a natural in a "50-million channel" universe. "Shill" publications also abound - sites that affect objectivity while secretly promoting something. Currently,
the most common are "stock picker" sites. The U.S. Securities Exchange Commission has conducted dozens of raids against these frauds. Expect many future shill sites to be foreign
government funded and have political agendas.
LAW ENFORCEMENT: Petty jealousies and turf wars have hampered law enforcement co-operation for centuries. Fancy liaison programs have often failed because they were
voluntary. The Net makes co-operation a necessity because it easily makes crime international. Child pornographers operate internationally and require co-operation to combat.
Slowly, law enforcement agencies are adopting the Net's distributed nature, instead of fighting it. If the open source movement can make better software by sharing the effort amongst
programmers in different nations, so can the police. In times of tight budgets, there's no need to replicate each other's organizations when it concerns the Net.
INTELLIGENCE: The Net's an intelligence bonanza - news articles, scientific journals, academic forums, they're all online . (I ran a Web design company for a couple years and a
common joke was that corporate sites are really only there to help your competition know what you're up to.) Since it's all in digital format, it's catalogued easily. The real problem is no
longer finding info, it's trying to analyze it.
ESPIONAGE & SABOTAGE: Break-ins and sabotage occur more and more online . Less-clever news media focus on the sensational "evil kid hacker" prowling the wires. Those do
exist. But the bulk of espionage (and sabotage) comes from disgruntled employees in both the private and public sectors. The U.S. government has said since January, 1998, that it's
engaged in "cyberwar" - a stream of attacks the Pentagon dubs "Moonlight Maze." It believes many originate with the Russian Academy of Sciences.
While governments increase efficiency by moving operations on to networked computers, anyone who then breaks into that network can do incredible real world damage.
"Recruiting" is easier than ever online . Disgruntled employees are easier to find. And the apparent "anonymity" of the Net emboldens some people to act recklessly. Extremist groups
know the Net allows them to operate "cells" more effectively than previous methods. Many of these exist in the U.S.
On the flip-side, government spy networks can be permanently damaged with a single post. Last May, a list of British MI6 agents was published on a U.K. Web site. It's everywhere
now.
It's impossible to remove something once propagated across the Net.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
STARTING POINT: UCLA professor Leonard Kleinrock and the Honeywell computer that became the first node on the in 1969.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

9/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Document tor0000020010830dvae00zii

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

10/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

The Web celebrates 10th birthday! --- Academics laughed at new concept as late as 1991
The Toronto Star
962 words
13 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
The Web's celebrating its 10th birthday! Right here in Toronto.
The eighth WWW Conference is on - running May 11-14.
Appropriately, the Web's original designer, Tim Berners-Lee, gave the opening keynote speech.
While Al Gore may make goofy boasts that he "created the Internet ," and get teased mercilessly about that, Berners-Lee really can say he "created the World Wide Web ."
Berners-Lee had long sought to link data in the Bush-Nelson tradition. In 1980, while working for CERN (a European High-Energy Physics lab on both sides of the Swiss-French
border), he wrote a program - which he dubbed "Inquire-Within-Upon-Everything" - that permitted links to be made between nodes.
But the landmark event, which allows organizers to unfurl the "Ten Years After" banner, is the March, 1989, document he wrote for CERN entitled "Information Management: A
Proposal."
(To read it, visit www .w3.org/History/1989/proposal.html. [http://www.w3.org/History/1989/proposal.html.])
European CERN and American researchers got connected through the Net in 1987. That created a pressing need for a system of efficient data sharing. In the fall of 1990, BernersLee's superior (Mike Sendall) gave him a thumbs up and a NeXT cube. He started work on a graphic hypertext interface - what we today call a browser.
While munching in the CERN cafeteria, Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau bandied about names. Cailliau wanted to avoid raiding Greek mythos for a name. Berners-Lee coined " World Wide Web ." By May, 1991, there was a general release of WWW on CERN computers.
Now it was time to roll it out to the world. In August, software files were uploaded to alt.hypertext and a few other newsgroups. Mailing lists were opened.
In December, the Web was shown at Hypertext '91 in San Antonio, Texas. I attended Hypertext '96 in Washington D.C. and enjoyed hearing stories from conference veterans about
how academics in 1991 dismissed Berners-Lee's HTML system as sub-par - not up to speed. It was pooh-poohed.
The next major landmark event came in February, 1993: The release of an alpha version of Marc Andreessen's "Mosaic for X."
In March, 1993, the Web was a dwarf, accounting for 0.1 per cent of National Science Foundation traffic. In June, there were about 130 Web sites. By March, 1999, there were
4,389,131. (Source: Hobbes Internet Timeline)
In a selfless act which should be remembered, CERN gave the browser to the world as freeware. On April 30, CERN directors said WWW technology was usable by all.
In August, book publisher O'Reilly & Associates hosted the first WWW Wizards Workshop in Massachusetts. Mosaic browsers existed for X, PC/Windows and Macintosh.
By December, 1993, the Web began garnering mainstream media attention - which has not stopped.
Next month, Internet In A Box was sold retail, bringing the browser into homes. Understanding what was happening, in March, 1994, Jim Clark, Andreessen and buddies launched a
new business called Mosaic Communications - which would, of course, become Netscape.
And Netscape begat Microsoft Internet Explorer, which begat the Justice Department antitrust suit against the Monks of Redwood, which begat the merger of Netscape with AOL,
which begat vast new millions coming online , which begat further convergence of all human communication.
And Tim Berners-Lee saw it was good. So he decided to stop by Toronto - Ten Years After.
THE HYPE ON HYPERTEXT: It's all about the HT in the HTML and the HTTP.
HT is "Hypertext." Hypertext is text which isn't linear, isn't narrative. Hypertext bristles with links to text outside the document you're in.
And because it's not linear, the HT part drives traditional storytellers mad. When they get online , they want TV-like streaming of attention. (Better rethink the game.)
By December, 1993, the Web began garnering mainstream attention, which has not stopped. HyperMedia is hypertext that includes pictures, sounds, videos, etc. It's a convergence of
media.
Back in the Jurassic Days of 1993, I saw something that forever changed my life: CBC Radio was putting programs online .
It was using Gopher. Here was Canada's staid national broadcaster messing around with crazy .au sound files. It took 45 minutes to download a 12-minute show. And the sound was
crap. What a great advance for communications!
. . . but I knew it was.
It was the first sprout of something that would be massive. Shortly thereafter I pitched both Toronto Computes! and eye magazine about making them the first established paper in
Canada to come online . Toronto Computes! turned me down; eye said yes. I became eye's Internet editor and it made journalism history.
But Gopher didn't link from inside documents. You needed the World Wide Web for hypertext.
Hypertext heralded "convergence," that day when all media - documents, books, movies, music, newspapers , TV, whatever - are accessible from the same spot.
The "idea" of the convergence pre-dates modern times. It was articulated as early as Vannevar Bush's 1945 Atlantic Monthly article, "As We May Think." Bush was a science advisor to
Franklin Roosevelt.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

11/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

He conceived of a machine called a "Memex" that would permit the user to access all forms of stored data from one location. That was a precursor of the modern Web browser - which
integrates data from all around the world, bringing it to our personal computers.
Our modern Memex is our computer, served up through the Net - using the Web, in particular.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
xxxxx xxxxxxxx: xxx xxxxxxxx Web sites like CitySearch will be the successfule-commerce model of the .
Document tor0000020010830dv5d00cp4

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

12/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Focus

'Most persons will be taking drugs' In 1966, a respected Globe and Mail science writer gazed into his crystal ball and came up
with an amazingly accurate portrait of life in 2000 (if you ignore the home robot and guilt-free tobacco)
NATALIE SOUTHWORTH
1744 words
30 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A14
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

What will the coming year bring? Just ask around. There has been no shortage of predictions made for the advent of 2000. Even Nostradamus got into the act -- 400 years ago.
According to some of his modern interpreters, the French physician and prophet foresaw, as well as his own death, that Russia and Iran would be at war with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization some time between 1999 and 2028 and that more than two-thirds of the world's population would die during that period.
Of course, not all prognostications are that extreme. In fact, many have come true, and few foretellers of the future have a better batting average than David Spurgeon, a former
science reporter with The Globe and Mail.
On Jan. 31, 1966, the newspaper published "2000: The Year of Spare-Part Humans, Instant Politics," in which Mr. Spurgeon outlined what people could expect in 2000.
When he looked into his crystal ball, LBJ was in the White House, The Beatles were exploding onto the pop scene, Canada was planning its 100th birthday celebrations and Lester
Pearson was prime minister.
So much has changed since then -- man walked on the moon, communism fell, technology and medicine advanced in leaps and bounds -- and yet Mr. Spurgeon came remarkably
close to describing life as it is today, with only a few absurd additions. Here is how his predictions have fared. One prediction is eerily in tune with modern culture. "Most persons will
be taking drugs of some kind -- if not male or female birth-control pills, then mood-changing pills to help them adapt to the demands of the ever-changing conditions of life."
The decline of the family, spirituality and neighbourhoods and the increase in stress, alienation and leisure have all been cited as contributors to the variability in people's moods. It is
estimated that 80 million people worldwide are afflicted with depression. According to the World Health Organization, by 2020, depression will be the most prevalent disease.
Increasingly, the solution is pills -- lots of them. Antidepressants, such as Prozac and Zoloft, are the main reason for the hike in benefit costs last year in the United States, according to
Express Scripts, a pharmacy benefit manager.
Furthermore, one senior citizen in 10 in Canada uses five or more drugs. And since one in four Canadians will be over the age of 65 by 2021, medicine cabinets are likely to become
even more cluttered.
With technological innovations, Mr. Spurgeon had a clear grasp of what was in store. He expected that newspapers would arrive via "facsimile broadcasts" or on television screens
that would change continuously, enabling readers to flip through the entire paper.
Newspapers still land on many people's doorsteps, but the concept of obtaining information electronically is hardly unknown today. "Machines will talk to other machines over
thousands of miles by wire," Mr. Spurgeon wrote, "and in turn will converse directly with man." In a nutshell, he summarized the greatest advance in computerized technology -- the
Internet and its World Wide Web .
As well, he predicted that homes in 2000 would contain small electronic computers that would direct the operation of appliances -- another bit of remarkable insight. The Massachusetts
Institute of Technology is developing a talking oven mitt that tells bakers when their bread is ready. It is also creating an espresso machine that supplies not only drinks, but music,
weather and Internet -based news through a computer monitor.
Our insatiable need for entertainment and leisure also drew attention. "There will, of course, be an elaborate entertainment centre in the house of 2000," Mr. Spurgeon predicted. "It will
be controlled by the house computer, and will provide free-standing, three-dimensional home movies or television pictures in colour with stereophonic sound."
He also correctly forecast that the climate would be warmer as a result of an increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from the burning of coal, oil and gas in large quantities. The
depletion of the ozone layer and global warming has proved to be one of the dominant environmental concerns of the past 30 years.
The 1966 predictions were mostly on the mark in the field of human reproduction -- including medicine's ability to implant ova from one woman into the womb of another.
But this prophecy loses some lustre when it cites the main reason for the innovation -- to preserve virgins. "Virgin births will also be possible because fertilized eggs could be implanted
into the wombs of virgins."
The sexual revolution , though only a few years off, clearly wasn't on the radar screen.
For political prognostications, Mr. Spurgeon turned to such pundits as Professor Asa Briggs, dean of social science at the University of Sussex. He declared that by 2000 political
parties would not have changed dramatically, although voters would become disenfranchised.
"The idea of public service will have been battered and there will be a search for substitutes," Prof. Briggs said.
Given the year of the intern, the president and his cigar, some will argue that the idea of public service has not been battered as much as it became X-rated. Political parties are
struggling to recruit worthy candidates at a time when more voters are becoming alienated from the political process.
Mr. Spurgeon looked to U.S. television pioneer Vladimir Zworykin for future changes to the political process. Dr. Zworykin envisioned a kind of continuous referendum, or a direct
democracy in which voters could offer their opinions on policy and important issues via radio and television.
He thought that governments would listen attentively, gauging popular opinion. Politicians rely on polls more than ever to learn about the needs and complaints of voters.
Given the high number of phone-in talk shows and political news programs, Dr. Zworykin was on to something. The problem is he did not consider that the entertainment value
garnered from such programs might outweigh their political effect.
In 1997, 99 per cent of Canadian households had a television, 74 per cent were connected to cable and 13 per cent had computers that were on-line.
Mr. Spurgeon envisioned that houses in the year 2000 would be produced en masse but also be individualistic. While most houses in any given subdivision today are identical,
undermining any possible claim to individuality, they are produced en masse.
The article also correctly predicts that man would reach the moon, which happened four years after the article was published.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

13/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Of course, even great prognosticators have their off days. Nostradamus expected World War Three to break out last July, and we're still waiting.
Had all Mr. Spurgeon's prophecies come true, people would be having knowledge molecules injected into their brains to make them more intellectual and relying on hydroplanes for
mass transit. Cars would be fewer and much safer, robots would do all the housework and meteorologists would decide how much rain falls and when.
Mr. Spurgeon also expected that heart disease would be brought under control by a combination of diet, exercise, drugs and surgery. While heart surgery and preventive medications
have improved, Canadians are getting fatter.
Since 1985, the proportion of overweight Canadians increased from 22 per cent among men to 34 per cent in 1996 and from 14 per cent among women to 23 per cent.
Adding to the problem, 57 per cent of Canadians are physically inactive, according to the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Poor diet and lack of exercise help explain why North America's
No. 1 killer is heart disease.
Another shortcoming: the declaration that by 2000 a substitute for tobacco would have reduced the incidence of lung cancer. Instead, smoking still ranks well ahead of suicide, motorvehicle crashes, AIDS and homicide combined as a cause of early death.
Still, despite the occasional misstep, The Globe's prophet displayed an uncanny grasp of what life would be like 34 years down the road. Now that we're practically there, what's in store
for the next thousand years? A cure for cancer, human clones, talking pigs?
Don't ask Nostradamus. Natalie Southworth is a Globe and Mail reporter who wishes people would stop predicting the end of the world.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS
Richard Noone, author of the recent book 5/5/2000: Ice -- The Ultimate Disaster, says that on May 5, 2000, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn will be aligned with Earth for the
first time in 6,000 years. On that day, the ice buildup at the South Pole will upset Earth's axis, sending trillions of tonnes of ice over the surface of the planet.
According to the Great Pyramid at Giza built in 2170 BC, the world will end on Sept. 17, 2001. The inside passages of the pyramid document the major events in history, with one inch
representing one year. The passageways run out in 2001.
In 1945, Scientific American magazine predicted that computers would get smaller -- weighing as little as one ton.
In 1966, Time magazine cited futurists predicting automobiles would be replaced with hovercrafts by the year 2000.
Psychic visionary Edgar Cayce said Earth's poles would shift between 1998 to 2001, most of Japan would sink into the sea, most of New York would disappear and the Great Lakes
would empty into the Gulf of Mexico.
The Book of Revelations (20:7-9) says the Messiah will come back to Earth for a second time to take charge of the world and bind Satan for 1,000 years.
Dilbert predicts in the future "all work will be outsourced, until all the work on the planet is being done by one guy."
In his novel 2010: Odyssey Two, Sir Arthur C. Clarke says that one day human beings will be able to colonize the moon even in the absence of oxygen. He also describes a future that
includes extraterrestrial civilization on Jupiter's moon Europa.
According to Gerald Celente, director of the U.S. Trends Research Institute, computer literacy will be as universal as learning how to drive.
In 3001: the Final Odyssey, Sir Arthur makes several predictions about life in the millennium after next. Everyone will either be a deist or theist and ultimate dream machines will show
imagined life as reality.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvcu01v0t

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

14/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Power searching --- With a billion-plus Web sites, it's no wonder conventional search engines - even those not tainted by
financial links - do a dreadful job of retrieving the info you need. But a new generation of `natural language' tools aims to
change that.
Jeff Evans
3345 words
9 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

When my daughter Kate went last minute shopping for some required texts for a study tour in Europe, I took her to Abelard Books on Queen St. W. in Toronto.
"Do you have Night by Elie Weisel," she asked the clerk. He blinked and said with assurance, "No."
This was not the answer we had hoped for, but it was accurate and useful, and saved us time that we otherwise might have spent pointlessly wandering the bookshelves.
Kate then asked if he had a particular translation of a classical Greek play, and instantly he pointed to a shelf. There it was.
Good librarians and booksellers seem to have a literally encyclopedic knowledge of the collections they preside over, and they usually turn out to have read an amazing number of the
more notable books.
They are survivors of an ancient human tradition, of designated keepers of knowledge whose lives are spent remembering, and then passing on a vast body of communal memory. In
the age of the Internet , though, who is smart enough to help us locate the information we need to find on the vast and ever changing World Wide Web ?
The age of information overload seems to create a "five minute memory," where every day most of us breeze by an infinity of random, disconnected, transient ads, entertainment,
unsolicited propositions and symbolic noise. To stay more or less sane, we learn to filter much it out and discard it. We don't even try to connect the dots and relate every bit of this
chaos to every other bit.
When a newbie first gets on the Net, he or she often initially enjoys the fresh, disorienting experience of bathing in the datastream and being swept away in unknown directions.
But after a while, the realization sets in that the World Wide Web can be the World Wide Waste of Time. A lot of the content is dreary, and the charm wears off.
One's own personal agendas usually reassert themselves, causing us to settle into an online routine of spending virtually all of our Internet time in a few sites that meet our needs for
work, socializing, learning and entertainment.
When we have to find some particular new information on the Internet to use for work or school, that comfortable routine created by hanging around in our own neighbourhood on the
Web can quickly be replaced by stressful, time consuming and frustrating floundering in unknown territory.
According to current estimates, there are about a billion Web pages in existence on today's Internet and the number is increasing by many millions every month. How to find one
particular needle in a billion haystacks?
With conventional search engines, if you type a question such as "Buffy the Vampire Slayer episodes" into the search window and press the "Enter" key, your question will be sent over
the Internet to a search engine computer containing a database of Web sites, and a computer program will try to find matches to your question from millions of possible Web page
examples. In a few seconds, you will usually be presented a screen-sized list of suggested Web sites to check out. If you click on one address or URL (universal resource locator), the
Web page from that address will pop up on your screen - if it still exists.
Sometimes, the search engine finds exactly what you wanted, and presents it at the top of the search return screen. Usually, however, it doesn't. This is when the fun starts, as you
start digging through the search engine's returns to your question. You start scrolling down pages of returns, clicking on site after irrelevant site.
Many search engines will list how many possible matches it has found to your question. Sometimes, for popular subjects (like sex, money, religion, baseball or cars), the number of
responses can run into the millions. Search engine hell begins when instead of useful matches to your search for Buffy episodes, you get page after page of irrelevant responses, often
loaded with ads or even solicitations to commercial sites - even smut sites. This is "search engine spam," pages that have been programmed to trick search engines into placing them
at the top of the list of answers to your question.
Ideally, a search engine should be to the vast resources of the Internet what the bookseller at Abelard's is to the inventory of his store - a perfect guide. In practice, however, search
engines are often woefully bad. As many Internet professionals state frequently and with complete seriousness, "Search Sucks." To find what you want on the Internet , you will have
to learn to search smart.
WHY SEARCH SUCKS:
There are dozens of well-known search engine sites such as AltaVista, Excite, Northern Light, Google, and Lycos. Some of them have traffic flows that run into millions of visitors per
day. Generally, the companies that offer these major "free" search engines to Internet users have invested a lot of money in creating and maintaining these services.
Each big search engine requires the creation of a vast database of tens or hundreds of millions of Web sites on large database server computers. Special software programs (often
called spiders) crawl the Web, automatically looking for Web pages to record in the database.
Newly discovered Web pages are recorded in the Web database on the search engine servers, but previously recorded Web pages are also checked for recent updates. So far, so
good.
However, all search engines cost money to operate, and the companies that run the search sites can only afford to do so if there is a business reason to justify the expense.
Increasingly, search engines are expected to not only pay their way, but to turn a profit. Most Internet users won't use a for-pay search site, so how are they financed?
In general, search sites pay for themselves by selling their ability to attract large numbers of Web users who come on to the search site to look for information on the Internet . The
promise to deliver your eyeballs is what search engine operations dangle in front of potential advertisers and sponsors.
The revenues that search sites are required to produce by selling ads and engaging in e-commerce mean that far from being a "free" philanthropic service, search engines are the
facade of a very tough, hard-nosed business.
Well, again, so far, so good. If this is as far as the compromising of search sites went, it could be thought of as a bit like old-fashioned broadcast TV - in return for spending a little time
looking at sponsors' messages, viewers get a "free" service.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

15/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

However, in subtle and not so subtle ways, the profit motive has combined with a lack of ethical or professional standards to corrupt search sites, to the detriment of users.
The first distortion that economic realities impose on the usefulness of search sites is that of simple budget limitations. This is understandable: no search engine operation has the
unlimited budget to search the entire Internet every day, and offer a perfectly complete and up to date set of the world's Web pages.
Instead, all the search engines only search and catalogue a fraction of the Web, and they update their listings at intervals that might run many days, or weeks, or months.
In a recent survey, taken in spring, 1999, the major search engines were found to list between 7 per cent and 25 per cent of the Web sites in existence. When you start to search the
Web, it should be in the realization that the majority of Web sites are completely invisible to the search engine you are using.
For administrative or budgetary reasons, a search site may also simply slow down or stop crawling the Web for new sites, and within days, the validity of its database begins to decay,
as Web sites start up, disappear, or change . If you find that a lot of the links that are displayed in search results no longer lead to active Web pages, that's a good sign that the search
engine is not updating its database regularly.
Last month it was reported that the Alta Vista search site had largely suspended general updating of its listings nearly two months previously. Alta Vista had evidently not notified its
users of this situation, which was reported in the press when some users noticed a near absolute lack of new or updated Web sites in their searches.
Much more worrying is the outright sale of positions on search engine results pages. In theory, the first answers to appear on a search engine screen after you've asked your question
should be the best answers that the search engine can find. In fact, however, money plays a role in what shows up on your search returns pages.
Some search engines sell ad space on search returns pages, contaminating the reliability and credibility of the entire site. The GoTo.com search engine/e-commerce site
( www .goto.com [http://www.goto.com/]) is at least honest about it. When I typed in a request for information on "Philanthropy," the first eight returns were listings for advertisers who
were paying for top billing on the search returns.
As well, search engine "spammers" use a variety of programming tricks to push their own Web page addresses to the top of search return lists. Techniques include inserting invisible
key words at the top of their sites that have nothing to with the actual content of the site.
So, for instance, one time when I typed a request for information on Sony monitors into Alta Vista, I got as a response literally dozens of ad pages for an English computer products
company selling everything except Sony monitors. Hidden at the top of the Web page were lines of text the same colour as the page background, so that they were invisible to the eye.
The lines of text listed dozens and dozens of key words to register with search engines, including "Sony" and "monitor."
If the operators of the search engine sites are not diligent at spotting and keeping out spammers, the reliability of the search engine can decline rapidly. If you find a high percentage of
completely irrelevant responses to your question, two of the most likely causes are ingenious spammers and negligent search engine operators.
Most search engines use Boolean logic. Essentially, a Boolean expression uses a preposition such as AND, OR, NOT, IF, THEN, and EXCEPT between the keywords to give computer
software a specific instruction about how to look for an answer.
So, if you type the Boolean expression Mel AND Gibson, or Mel + Gibson into a search window, the search software will generally select only pages in which the word combination of
"Mel" and "Gibson" occur together and in the correct order, with "Mel" appearing just before "Gibson."
Boolean expressions used in a search can give very accurate and precise results, but are often not very useful in interpreting ambiguous, or close-but-not-exact matches with the
question.
And they are woefully unable to filter out search spam.
Most search sites also have information and "power features" for serious research. Alta Vista, for example, has an "Advanced Search" option and special search sections for finding
images and audio and video files, phone numbers, people's addresses and directions to locations across the U.S.
META SEARCH:
Recognizing the technical and ethical limitations of any one search engine, programmers around the world have developed special search utilities that will automatically send your
question out to many search engines simultaneously, thus speeding up the task of getting your question to cover most of the Web.
These multiple engine tools are called meta search programs. There are literally hundreds of them currently available, ranging in quality from amateur hacks to extremely polished,
professional software.
In the process of testing several dozen of them, I found that if a meta search program simply fires your question out to many Web sites, it will multiply the amount of spam and garbage
you have to manually sort through. A select group of the best meta search tools apply filtering techniques and at the very high end, sophisticated linguistic analysis to provide a nearly
perfect search solution.
Meta search software is widely available for free download from the Internet . Any of the big shareware Web sites such as TUCOWS ( www .tucows.ca [http://www.tucows.ca/]) or
CNET ( www .shareware.com [http://www.shareware.com/]) have a section for free or shareware search utilities. Two of the best sites for search info and software are About.com's
search section (http://websearch.about.com [http://websearch.about.com]), and DaveCentral's directory of links to meta search and other search engine software sites
(http://davecentral.com/2077 [http://davecentral.com/2077].html).
Among the shareware and free meta search tools, Copernic ( www .copernic.com [http://www.copernic.com/]), WebFerret ( www .ferretsoft.com/net [http://www.ferretsoft.com/net]
ferret/products.htm), and Bullseye ( www .intelliseek.com/s [http://www.intelliseek.com/s] tore/bullseye/pro-info.htm) were among the best. They all have pro versions with additional
features that are for sale, but the shareware versions are very capable.
The basic meta search technique of querying many search engines at once is supplemented by a variety of filtering techniques to sort out low quality responses, and features for saving
or customizing searches and making them simpler.
But a new generation of "natural language" search technologies are becoming even more powerful. These are software programs that are designed to intelligently assess the
relationship between a searcher's question and the millions of documents being searched.
Companies such as Inktomi (developers of the search technology used by many search engines), Microsoft, IBM, Apple and Canada's KCSL (a Toronto company that has invented the
most widely used indexing, spelling and grammar software) are working to develop technology that can make highly accurate guesses about the meaning of a human being's written or
spoken words.
Intelligent search of the written documents that make up the world's Web pages can virtually eliminate search engine spam, and put only the most truly relevant information on to the
searcher's screen. In a few years, chances are you'll be able to speak your questions at your computer, and receive extremely accurate, complete answers sifted from billions of Web
sites, in many different languages.
Both Apple and Microsoft are deeply involved in trying to improve search technology. Apple's vision of "knowledge navigators," and Microsoft's mantra of "information at your fingertips"
were both based on an assumption that the ability of software to intelligently search the world library and analyze what it found would transform business decision making and
education.
Apple has released a new version of its Sherlock Internet search software in its latest Mac OS9. Sherlock 2 ( www .ap [http://www.ap/] ple.com/sherlock/overview.ht ml) now groups
search categories into channels, to make it easier to meta search the most appropriate search engines, and to calibrate the search in the most efficient way.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

16/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

So, Sherlock 2 offers a files channel for searching your hard drive, an Internet channel for meta searching, a shopping channel for comparison shopping searches, and other
channels, including a user-customizing option. Sherlock 2 is quite good, but alas, it is available only for the Mac.
Microsoft, not to be left out, has powerful search capabilities in its MSN Web site, and has introduced its own plain language search option in the latest edition of the Encarta
Encyclopaedia. Recognizing the importance of linguistic analysis, Microsoft licenses the Canadian KCSL spelling and grammar software in many versions of its office software, and has
also recently published its own comprehensive new English dictionary, in digital , searchable format.
But, after a long research period, the best Internet search software I've encountered is KCSL's new X-Portal Findware, a brilliant product that marries the KCSL company's nearly 20
years of innovation in linguistic analysis with the demands of Internet search.
Simply put, X-Portal carries with it a huge, expertly written reference library which it compares the user's question to, in order to guess what the word sequence and definitions probably
refer to. It then goes out to the Internet and searches as many search engines or searchable Web sites as the user asks it to.
X-Portal fetches back the text from all the likely looking Web pages it can find, and carefully analyzes their linguistic contents and structure. X-Portal then delivers to the user the best
pages it has found. The process is dead simple, and extremely accurate.
Without reservation, X-Portal is the one software tool in existence that nails Internet search almost perfectly. The decades of research into indexing, data compression, and linguistic
analysis that KCSL has in its organizational memory has made them the only software developer in the world until now that really understands how to do Internet search properly.
This first version of X-Portal is designed to be installed on an individual user's Windows PC, and is only compatible with MS Internet Explorer. The software integrates into Internet
Explorer seamlessly, becoming a search window similar to the Internet Explorer History or Favourites windows.
Netscape Navigator and Mac versions, and a server version for Web search engines and databases, are planned for year 2000. I use X-Portal on a daily basis in my journalistic
activities, and find it saves huge amounts of time and delivers the most accurate and comprehensive Web search results. It works adequately on a 56 kbps dial up Internet
connection, but really shines on a high bandwidth cable modem or DSL service connection.
On the downside, KCSL's X-Portal is an anomaly in the search software market in terms of cost, packaging and distribution. It sells for $79.95, on a CD-ROM, when all the competing
search products are either embedded in operating systems or other software, or available for free download from the Web.
Whether or not X-Portal succeeds as an independent product, or ends up being licensed, for instance, to America Online or Microsoft, or simply inspires the next generation of much
improved meta search software, it is a great achievement.
FINAL THOUGHTS:
The nature of the Web as a hybrid knowledge resource is evolving rapidly as PC software integrates with dynamic information on the Web.
Besides search engines, one of the simplest ways to gain access to a mix of both digital information and live experts is by using the tens of thousands of newsgroups, instant
messaging buddies, tech support pages, and discussion forums on the Web.
But a word of warning: on the Web there are few guarantees or certainties. Although Web search software is getting better all the time, nobody has developed a sincerity meter to test
the quality of Web-based information, or the purity of the motives of people you may encounter online .
Anything you find on the Web may be tainted, and you need to be very careful about trusting personal information to anyone you meet online , or trusting any supposed facts found
there.
The old Latin phrase Caveat Emptor, or buyer beware, goes double for the supposedly free information to be found online .
No matter how powerful technology claims to be, there are no absolute guarantees. Keep your eyes open though, and you never know what you may find.
--Jeff Evans is editor of Canadacomputes.com. He can be reached via e-mail at jeffevans9@sympatico.ca.
SEARCH IS ON: Ilia Kaufman, president of Toronto-based KCSL Inc., makers of the highly-touted search software, X-Portal Findware. For a brief profile of the company, see page 8. RESULTS ARE IN:
When activated, X-Portal Findware pops up like the channel bar in your Explorer browser.
Document tor0000020010830dvc90199l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

17/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Internet: What next? --- The Net has certainly made an impressive debut on the late 20th century cultural stage, but where is
it going?
Derek Thomson
2518 words
10 June 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

As we rush headlong toward the new millennium, wondering how many of our electronic gadgets will turn into pumpkins at the stroke of midnight, we are sure to be inundated with a
motherlode of year-end reviews. For not only do we have the 1990s to concern ourselves with, we also have a century and a millennium to assess.
As a result, when pundits sit down at the close of the year to determine the most important technological advances of the past, many will place the Internet high on their lists.
But while the Internet 's prominence in the last few years of this decade, both culturally and technologically, is undeniable, if we expand the scope to include the past hundred or
thousand years, its significance becomes greatly diminished.
While the Internet has managed to attain the status of cultural phenomenon in only a handful of years, it is yet to have the same cultural impact on 20th century society as, for
instance, the automobile or television.
Nor, despite its promise as a truly global and democratic medium, has it been able to significantly alter our sensibilities about the production and distribution of information in the same
manner as the invention of the printing press.
In fact, given its place in a larger historical context and its potential as a commercially viable medium, the Internet may prove to be the most significant technological advance of the
21st Century.
Part of the problem with assessing the future of the Internet is that while most commentators acknowledge it has finally emerged from its infancy, they remain unsure of what
direction it will take. Attempts at firmly determining where it might go are akin to trying to predict your child's career path after his first day of kindergarten.
Yet, at this time at least, the digital television convergence model - whereby computer and television functions are merged into a single, all-encompassing medium - appears to be the
one garnering the most hype.
Envisioning a universal communications system, many multinational media companies are gambling that convergence will allow them to corral an audience that has become
increasingly fragmented by a variety of media options. And in the process reap the billions of dollars in revenue that online advertising and e-commerce is expected to generate.
It is their contention, backed by an investment of millions of dollars, that convergence will signify as radical a departure from traditional television broadcasting as radio and television
had been from newspapers . In other words, in this new media distribution platform, today's Internet portal becomes the first or starting channel on tomorrow's television set.
Whether the Internet - or, at the very least, the Web - migrates to digital television remains a subject of much debate. Many people argue that there exist irreconcilable differences
between these two media forms that make convergence unlikely.
But Derrick de Kerckhove, director of the McLuhan Program in Culture and Technology at the University of Toronto, believes that such a migration is a logical assumption. In doing so,
he likens Web TV to the Trojan horse, in that it is the gift that brings the Internet to a much wider audience.
"It makes sense to think that if you can bring the Internet to the television set you penetrate the household of the individual," he says. "To go out and buy a computer, for the majority of
the population, is a real operation. So I see it (arriving) through a medium that people are familiar and comfortable with, which is television, rather than through a medium that they have
to specialize in."
With the proliferation of laptop and handheld devices, de Kerckhove is quick to point out that mobility, as opposed to hard wiring, may become the next evolutionary step for the
Internet . However, with hypertext links already providing a fluidity of movement between various media, he also believes that an interconnectedness of all media is inevitable.
"The flexibility of moving from one medium to the other is, in fact, extremely comfortable. And I would say that's the joy of television plus Internet plus Web," he says.
As to the increased corporate presence on the Internet - and, by extension, its vested interest financially in convergence - de Kerckhove points out that there is plenty of room for
everybody in cyberspace.
"I don't condemn the corporate presence. If you need it, you take it; if you don't need, you don't go for it. It's not going to destroy everything else," he says.
"The new market is information, the new economy is based on connectivity and information, and the new means of making money and surviving are going to be redistributed because
of this new tool," he argues. "With the commercialization of the Internet , the problem is not that it will invade your consciousness. The problem is a lot of information is going to be
proprietary."
Whereas traditional television broadcasting has always competed for the individual viewer's attention because it is restricted by specific time slots, the Internet reverses this
relationship.
"In terms of the user's point of view, the content of the Internet is literally in the mind of the beholder," de Kerckhove says. "What I'm saying is, interest groups online do not compete
for space - they don't even compete for attention. The attention comes from you; it doesn't come from the medium.
"So whether the corporate world is taking over the Internet means nothing at all to me. If I need the corporate world, if I need e-commerce, I'm glad to have it. But nobody's invading
my mind."
Unlike de Kerckhove, Arthur Kroker is skeptical about the prospect of the Internet moving to digital television. Kroker, who along with his wife, Marilouise, is one of Canada's leading
commentators on cyberculture, argues that the Internet and television are reflective of two very different audiences.
As a result he remains unsure of how convergence will eventually play itself out in the foreseeable future .
"In terms of strategy for development, there is a real tendency toward the consolidation of the Internet into a commercially based medium fashioned on commercial television and
radio of the past. Which means that it becomes part of the ideology of the market setting," he says.
Kroker further notes that under the control of a multinational media giant such as Microsoft, the Web would probably adopt what he terms as "a very strict, very narrowly reductive form
of convergence.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

18/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

"On the other hand, the Net and the Web are really reflective of a profoundly new medium that is pluralistic and has a diffusiveness built right into its very structure. It is a medium unlike
any other medium in that it has real possibilities for democratization," he says.
"So, I see the real future being a painful kind of contest between these two general trends. One toward consolidation and the other toward allowing the Net to (simply) be the Net."
While several contemporary forms of media, such as television and radio, are often stultifying, Kroker sees the future Internet as a medium that possesses possibilities that are highly
creative and stimulating for the user.
"It's not so much a matter of (the Internet ) bringing knowledge to the masses, it's that in a creative way a lot of people are integrating the Net into their own lives," he says.
"Like, for example, older people who are finding the Net a real means of communication and research. Or CD-ROM artists, who at a recent conference at Cornell University, began to
talk about their uses of the Net and the Web in a way that forms a creative esthetic perspective."
But as with any discussion about the future of the Internet there exists an almost endless number of possible avenues it might take in the next decade or so. And convergence may,
in effect, turn out to be a dead end.
The Net will most likely become more and more invisible. Like the telephone, but easier to use.
"It's very difficult to deal with five or 10 years (in the future ), because the leading Net and multinational media companies themselves haven't got a clue as to what's going to happen
over the next three years," Kroker says.
"But I think the Net has really changed the way we think in a very profound way and its possibilities haven't even begun to be explored."
Christopher Dewdney, author of Last Flesh: Life In The Transhuman Era, also questions the viability of television and the Internet merging.
"Why it hasn't happened yet is sort of a mystery and a bad sign for convergence," he says. "There must be a lot of competing, vested interests that are stalling turning TVs into
computers. That's what Nintendo 64 does after all. So, if our kids can use TVs as computers to play their games why can't we use TVs as computers to cruise the Net."
Instead, at least in the foreseeable future , Dewdney sees the commercialization of the Internet continuing unabated and 3D graphic MUD (multi-user domain) sites becoming the
next online craze. In fact, he believes this commercialization will become even more embedded in mainstream culture.
Part of the problem with the Internet , at least at this point in its evolution, is that it remains very much a solitary activity. After all, we access the Internet alone, hunched over the
keyboard.
"We are spending more and more time alone in front of our screens, yet at the same time we are electronically socializing more and more. So, it is a paradoxical movement in two
simultaneous and contradictory directions. We spend more time communicating with each other, yet physically we are more and more isolated," Dewdney says.
For people like Dewdney the future of the Internet lies not in its migration to digital television, but with its eventual integration with the human mind.
Like de Kerckhove's "mind/machine direct connect," where at some future point computer functions are linked directly to our cognitive responses, Dewdney sees such advances as
voice recognition software leading to less of a reliance on physical interaction with our computers. And it is this trend that will lead to what he calls the posthuman era.
"In the future the Net will become important as a virtual dimension containing countless simulated realities, some of which will become as complex as the real world. We are building a
structure into which we will take the virtual plunge when we are ready," he says.
Or, as he writes in Last Flesh, "perhaps we intuitively know that the Internet is the necessary forerunner of the collective mind."
To David Hudson, editor of the online journal Rewired and author of Rewired: A Brief (And Opinionated) History Of The Net, the most significant development of the Internet has
already occurred. And it is this shift that will continue to influence further development in the foreseeable future .
"When the Net was turned over to the private sector its essential nature in every sense - technical, cultural and so on - changed dramatically within a very short period of time. What
used to be done in the name of research is now done for profit.
"Not necessarily a bad thing, since financial self-interest is driving a tremendous amount of technical innovation," he says. "None of this is to say that there won't be any or even many
major shifts in the next five to 10 years - but I do believe that any and all of the subsequent shifts will be determined by this single public-to-private shift that began around 1991."
When Hudson speaks of convergence, he is quick to remind us that any attempt at creating a single unit that can do everything is undermined by wireless technology. With people
checking their e-mail via cell phones and downloading electronic business cards from their Palm Pilots to their hard drives, we may, in fact, end up splitting into even smaller networks.
"Nevertheless, convergence works as a term if you think of all this interaction between animate and inanimate objects as one big digital buzz," he says.
"Media or corporate convergence isn't necessarily technical convergence. If you think of Barry Diller's grab at Lycos it may or may not really be about clicking on a Cuisinart you see on
the Home Shopping Network. It may be more about driving consumers to various outlets within the same media or corporate network without the network necessarily being a real,
physical entity.
"As for the cultural impact, it's all about making it easier for consumers to consume and easier for corporations to sell. The Net will most likely become more and more invisible. As
ubiquitous as the telephone, but easier to use. It's actually a fascinating, if occasionally frightening, process to observe."
How this corporate model of convergence will affect our sense of community online is still an unknown. But Hudson argues that online relationships are deceptive and, like the
medium upon which they are based, virtual.
"For the most part, I see a general sobering up after the heady days in which it seemed computer mediated communication could make up for a sense of community," he says. "My
hunch is that communities as they exist now - on systems resembling old BBSes or Web-based boards - will be a phenomenon extremely specific to a very limited window in time in the
overall development of the Net."
As to the Internet 's long-term future , Hudson refuses to be drawn in by some of the more fantastic predictions emanating from today's cyber-philosophers.
Rather, he prefers to view the Internet , and its future possibilities, from the perspective of a larger historical context.
"Whether or not we'll see changes as essential as, say, information becoming the only commodity that has any real worth, is still a wide open question.
"But I do think it's possible to imagine a global network blossoming from wireless technology rather than from the relatively primitive physically wired nodes linked all but by hand
around the world," he says.
"The point is, at the moment, we perceive the Net as the crest of a long and tall wave in the history of media and communications. Throughout our history we've dreamed of a universal
communications system that would unite all humankind and spark universal understanding. We've pinned these hopes on a series of technological innovations.
"Despite the failure of each of them to realize our idealistic/ideological goals, as pure technology, many of them have been spectacular - and none of them, the Net included, has been
the last in line."
---

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

19/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Derek Thomson is a Toronto-based freelance writer.
NET THINKERS: From top, left to right: McLuhan director Derrick de Kerckhove, Concordia University professor Arthur Kroker and his wife, Marilouise, and authors David Hudson and Christopher
Dewdney.
Document tor0000020010830dv6a00h4k

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

20/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Behind the screens The face of television is changing as the boob tube evolves into an interactive medium. What is the
couch potato to do?
MARK EVANS
2166 words
4 February 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

If you think that programming your VCR is difficult, the next generation of television equipment may be a nightmare.
That's because television as we know it is evolving from a 500-channel "boob tube" to a much more interactive medium.
Within the next few years, people may be able to use their TVs to do everything from surfing the World Wide Web , to shopping, banking and ordering their favourite videos.
Interactive television is becoming a reality, but what exactly is it?
If you believe the hype, your television will be a two-way appliance used to communicate, conduct business and entertain. People will be able to pay their mortgages, watch movies and
talk to relatives without leaving the comfort of the couch.
While televisions will probably look the same, the technology inside will become a lot more complex -- much like how the engines of automobiles now use computer chips to operate
more efficiently.
Those with a vested interest in making interactive TV successful believe people will become even more enthralled with the medium. Skeptics, however, say that most people have a
well-entrenched relationship with television as a one-way entertainment medium, and that this isn't likely to change .
But already Microsoft Corp.'s WebTV, which allows users to surf the Internet using their televisions, shows that people are becoming more active -- although in a rudimentary fashion.
Many of the biggest changes are already taking place behind the screen, in the form of digital technology being adopted by broadcasters and cable operators. Digital technology is,
perhaps, the cornerstone of the "new TV" because it will allow for the delivery of all kinds of services that aren't currently possible with analog technology.
The migration to digital -broadcasting technology is happening at a rapid pace in the United States, where the Federal Communications Commission has mandated that all 1,500
television stations there must be transmitting digital signals by 2003. Canadian regulators, meanwhile, are taking a wait-and-see approach before setting out a digital plan for the
21st century.
People have watched television in pretty much the same way for nearly 50 years. But Keith Kocho, president of Toronto-based Digital Renaissance Inc., says this will change as
consumers gain more control over how and when they use the medium.
"It will become much more user-driven and participatory," he predicts.
That's not to say that couch potatoes will become extinct. But they may grow a little less sluggish as they grab the remote control to purchase a product that grabs their attention.
Henry Nicholas, head of Broadcom Corp., says it's still too early to tell how much interactivity people will demand -- or want -- from their televisions.
If the research to date is any indication, he says, the foundation of interactive television will be its ability to enhance viewing.
"Most of the studies showed people didn't want truly interactive television," Mr. Nicholas says. "What they are interested in is customization of television, such as camera angles or
different statistics."
Interactive television's popularity could mirror the development of satellite television, which generated limited interest before it was launched, yet has become increasingly popular, he
notes.
All the hype now surrounding the "new TV" echoes what happened in the early 1990s, when Time-Warner Inc. was pushing its "Home of the 21st Century" concept. That idea included
video-on-demand and control over swimming pools, security systems and appliances through the TV set.
The large investments made by Time-Warner to develop the project evaporated because the technology needed to access these services was too expensive and there weren't enough
high-capacity networks to make interactive technology work well enough to fuel demand.
The landscape is different now, on several fronts. The Internet has become a mainstream vehicle, there have been billions of dollars invested by cable, telephone and wireless
companies to build high-speed digital networks, and some manufacturing standards have been established.
Despite the hype that seems to surround most consumer-oriented advances in technology, there are critics who don't believe in the "build it and they will come" theory.
Josh Bernoff, an analyst with Forrester Research Inc., says it would be wrong to suggest that consumers will change their television behaviour just because they now can.
"So many people have formed a relationship [with television] in which they can be relaxed and effortlessly entertained and informed. The idea that they can do their banking is not
realistic."
Mr. Bernoff's skepticism also extends to the popular idea that people will change their buying habits, using the television to surf through on-line catalogues and malls. People will shop
only if there's a "buy" button on the screen, he says.
In a recent report titled "Lazy Interactive TV," Mr. Bernoff argues that television watchers will use a limited number of interactive tools -- so long as they don't require much effort.
The most useful and popular applications, he says, will be program guides that will allow people to use their televisions more effectively. They'll offer ways to search for shows by title or
subject, provide reminders about programs you want to watch and automatically record previously selected choices.
Another sweet spot will be interactive commercials, which will allow consumers to link up to Web sites to get on-line brochures or sweepstakes entries, or to buy products.
Mr. Bernoff also believes consumers will be attracted to interactive sports, news and talk shows that allow them to do such things as click through Web sites for scores and statistics
during breaks in sports broadcasts, or participate in real-time polling while watching the Oprah Winfrey show.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

21/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The idea that consumers will use a limited number of interactive tools is supported by Michael MacMillan, chairman and chief executive officer of Alliance Atlantis Communications Inc.,
which produces such TV shows as Traders and Due South and owns two specialty channels, the Life Network and Home & Garden Television Canada.
"I always keep in mind that when you get home from work and you're tired and the dog is barking and the kids are fighting, do you want to look through hundreds and titles to watch the
earliest version of a Kafka production or sit on your couch and be entertained by a reasonable number of trusted suppliers?," he asks.
Mr. MacMillan believes Atlantis is well-positioned for interactive television with its ownership of the Life Network and Home & Garden Television.
He suggests that there's a natural affinity between specialty channels and interactivity because people who watch Home & Garden shows have a strong interest in the topic and may
be more inclined to purchase merchandise, surf related Web sites or pay to watch previous shows on the theme.
For many consumers, their initial foray into the digital world will be set-top boxes, which allow them to receive digital broadcasting signals on their older analog televisions.
These boxes, made by such companies as General Instrument Corp. of Horsham, Penn., and Scientific-Atlanta Inc. of Atlanta, can be used to surf the Internet , obtain video-ondemand services and make on-line purchases. General Instrument received an order last year to make 15 million set-top boxes for cable company Tele-Communications Inc. of
Englewood, Col.
Set-top boxes are expected to become ubiquitous within a few years, and there are a growing number of high-tech companies jumping on board.
Markham, Ont.-based ATI Technologies Inc. signed a $187.5-million (U.S.) deal last year to sell graphics chips and software to General Instrument, giving ATI a way to expand its $1billion business beyond the computer industry.
Other players include Irvine, Calif.-based Broadcom.com, whose technology is being used within set-top boxes to receive digital technology and audio signals, and Cisco Systems Inc.
of San Jose, which is moving into the consumer market.
Television makers are also gearing up for the "new TV" by developing digital products such as high-definition televisions. These devices will be able to receive digital signals without
a set-top box. The HDTVs now on the market cost $7,000 to $10,000 and -- not surprisingly -- sales have been slow.
It may be cable operators, however, who have the most to gain from digital TV because it will increase the capacity of their systems and, more importantly, provide new ways to boost
the bottom line.
This explains why Rogers Communications Inc. and Shaw Communications Inc. have invested millions of dollars to upgrade their systems.
Calgary-based Shaw completed the deployment of digital technology last year and has started to leverage the investment by aggressively promoting Shaw At Home, its high-speed
Internet access offering.
Shaw will immerse itself in digital technology later this year when it starts offering subscribers a new set-top box from General Instrument. With a Pentium 300 microprocessor from
Intel Corp. and four megabytes of memory, the new box can be used for Web surfing, telephone banking and Internet telephony.
Even if most of the new services being hyped fail to take off, cable operators would probably be pleased to use their upgraded systems to deliver video-on-demand and more pay-perview channels.
Just as E-mail has become the killer application of the Internet , video-on-demand could become the product that makes digital technology a profitable venture.
Shaw, for example, has already made its entire network bi-directional to allow its 1.46 million customers to order and receive movies.
That's important because Shaw has a licence with Toronto-based Alliance Atlantis to offer video-on-demand services, which it hopes to roll out next year.
Shaw is now testing the technology at its facility in Calgary, using powerful computers to show 24 movies at a time. When the service is launched, Shaw will be able to offer feature
films, children's films, documentaries and educational programs -- all for a fee.
Clearly, the cable giant is banking on interactive TV to cement its future -- even if its customers want to remain couch potatoes and live off movies, sports and talk shows.
DICTIONARY OF DIGITAL TELEVISION
HDTV: High-definition television is being touted as the next technological leap for couch potatoes because it will have sharper pictures and can deliver services such as video
conferencing, on-line shopping and Internet surfing. The popularity of HDTV is stunted by the high cost of the sets, about $7,000 to $10,000.
Set-top box: For an older, analog-based television to receive digital broadcasting signals, it will need a set-top box. Made by such companies as General Instrument Corp. and
Scientific-Atlanta Inc., set-top boxes let users watch television, surf the World Wide Web and make Internet -based telephone calls, all at the same time, while using a single cable
connection.
WebTV: A unit of Microsoft Corp., WebTV allows people to surf the World Wide Web using their televisions. The connection to the Internet is over telephone lines, but WebTV
recently signed a deal with EchoStar Communications Corp. to provide access through satellite-television services.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TV
1883: Paul Nipkow, a German scientist, invents a perforated spinning disk that can break down an image into a sequence of pictoral elements.
1923: Russian-born Vladimir Zworykin patents the iconoscope, an early electronic camera tube, in the United States.
1926: Scotsman John Logie Baird makes a public demonstration of television by broadcasting shadow pictures; two years later he is able to broadcast colour pictures and outdoor
scenes.
1928: General Electric presents the first TV drama. Sound is carried on a radio station, and the picture is seen on a three-by-four inch screen.
1932: An RCA subsidiary begins experimental telecasts atop the Empire State Building; four years later a converted radio station feeds programs to it twice weekly.
1939: The first television sets become available to the American public. NBC begins regular service.
1940: The first official network broadcast takes place.
1941: CBS presents its first newscast, on the bombing of Pearl Harbor; war later delays the construction of systems in the United States.
1950: The first community antenna TV service -- the precursor to cable TV -- begins in Pennsylvania.
1951: CBC initiates regular TV programs in Montreal and Toronto; CBS begins limited colour broadcasts. A videotape recorder is publicly demonstrated for the first time.
1962: Toronto is the site of a trial for closed-circuit pay-TV.
1968: The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission is established.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

22/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

1970s: Japan develops a high-definition television system.
1975: Sony launches its Betamax VCR. The VHS follows a year later.
1982: The CRTC licenses Canada's first pay-TV services.
Sources: The 1998 Canadian and World Encyclopedia; Encyclopedia Americana; Les Brown's Encyclopedia of Television
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv240079s

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

23/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

E-COMMERCE III

Reflections on the digital divide Internet anthropologist Don Tapscott examines some of the social and business issues that
bubble up as we explore cyberspace
The Globe and Mail
2995 words
30 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
E1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Don Tapscott started using the Internet more than 20 years ago, which gives him an interesting vantage point on its emergence as a global economic and social phenomenon.
In a world dominated with marketing hype and an endless stream of optimistic forecasts, Mr. Tapscott has become one of the Internet 's leading consultants because he can offer
something valuable to the mix: perspective.
He has become a frequent speaker at conferences, writes a newspaper column and has written or co-written several books, including Growing Up Digital : The Rise of the Net
Generation, The Digital Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked Intelligence and Paradigm Shift: The New Promise of Information Technology.
During a recent interview, Mr. Tapscott talked about his career, how he became interested in the Internet and how the Internet 's growing popularity will affect politics, economics and
society as a whole.
Q. How did you get interested in the Internet ?
A. In 1969, I had to do my honours thesis in psychology at Trent University [in Peterborough, Ont.] and I estimated it would take three months to analyze the data. Trent didn't have a
computer but it had a telex machine connected to a computer at the General Electric factory in Peterborough. I learned how to program in Basic and the whole thing took 110 seconds. I
thought this thing would change the world.
In 1977, I was hired at Bell Northern Research to manage a group investigating the office of the future . We had a couple dozen people whose job it was to try to understand the
Internet , how we were using the Internet and how the Internet and [computers] would change knowledge workers.
We actually did research and implemented the kind of systems we have today. We had control groups that used the technology and looked at how they spent their time and
communicated. It was pre-personal computers so we used terminals linked to Digital minicomputers and Unix operating systems.
Our job was to understand technology and we had a budget to travel around the world and seek out anybody who knew anything. I met with anyone in the world who was thinking
about these things, and back then it was a very small group. We had figured out the new paradigm, but it was often received with coolness -- or worse, mockery, hostility.
BNR is such an incredible institution and resource we have in this country, with thousands of people -- a massive body of intellectual capital -- whose job is innovation. This is the
engine for entrepreneurialism and innovation in this country.
[When I left BNR in 1982], the president was John Roth [now Nortel Network Corp.'s president and chief executive officer] and he summoned me into his office because I was taking a
bunch of people with me. I thought it was going to be nasty. He said, 'Can I talk you out of it?' and I said, 'No.' He said, 'I like to see my graduates -- you are always welcome back.'
Q. Is there someone who has been a major influence on you?
A. In 1978, I met Douglas Englebart at Stanford Research Institute. For 10 years, he had an augmented-knowledge workshop where professionals used multifunctional workstations.
He invented the mouse, he invented word processing, he invented hyperlinks, which were the precursor to the Web. He invented many of the big innovations we have come to
understand today. When I met him, he was an older man. He was the father of this whole revolution and people are just beginning to realize that.
Q. What was your big breakthrough professionally?
A. I had written another couple of books and finally got the timing right in 1991 when I co-authored Paradigm Shift,which was my first bestseller. It was based on a $3-million study
conducted by [Montreal-based] DMR Group in 1987, and out of that study came the idea of the new paradigm and information technology.
I wasn't surprised [by the book's success]. I was, needless to say, very happy that it resonated. Lew Platt just retired from Hewlett-Packard and a number of people who knew him were
asked for personal notes that were being collected in a big binder. I described the experience of meeting him 10 years earlier.
He had asked me to come and sit with him and when I walked in the room and he had Paradigm Shift in his hands. He said, 'Before you sit down, I want you to know I love this book
and I never say that about a book.' The entire book was underlined and had 50 yellow stickies. He said, 'This is an important book that is going to change business and I can't thank
you enough for having written it.'
Q. There's a lot of talk about electronic commerce. What are your views? Will it live up to the hype?
A. Most people don't understand what electronic commerce is. They think it's the buying and selling of things on the Internet . That's 1 per cent of what's happening. The Internet is
the basis of a new infrastructure that has fundamentally changed our business models and the way we create wealth. In doing so, it is transforming the economy and every institution
in society.
I don't believe this is hyperbole. If anything, we are understating what's really happening. Throughout the 20th century, we created wealth through the integrated industrial corporations.
Henry Ford owned mahogany forests in Honduras to get the wood for dashboards. We organized ourselves into these firms because the transaction and interaction costs of creating
wealth in an open market are prohibitive. It has been prohibitive to think about such things as the cost of knowledge, executing transactions, handling payments and resolving conflicts.
We have created these firms that have an internal economy, organizational [and] structural procedures, business processes, controls and communication systems and this has been an
effective way to create wealth.
Now, there is a big change occurring, in which we have, throughout the economy, a deep, rich, publicly available network infrastructure which is becoming ubiquitous -- high in
bandwidth but, most important, rich in function. It's got transaction engines and payment systems and negotiation tools and collaboration environments and agents and rating schemes
and, soon, artificial intelligence. It is leading to a whole new world of possibilities in terms of how to structure ourselves for wealth creation.
Q. You head the Alliance For Converging Technologies. What is it?
A. The Alliance for Converging Technologies is a Canadian-based think tank that many say is the leading organization understanding these changes . Its work is sponsored by leaders
of the digital revolution . We are conducting a series of multimillion-dollar studies on how the Internet changes business models and strategy.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

24/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

We have developed a way of describing these new business models and there are five types:
1. Business Webs: People say to me, 'How do you create a great Web site with lots of eyeballs?' and we say, 'The last thing you want is a great Web site. What you want is a business
Web, which is a new organizational form for creating wealth.' As for eyeballs, you have the wrong body parts. It's hearts that count: relationships and trust.
2. Aggregations: like [on-line brokerage firm] E-trade that aggregate all the value that a stock broker provides from different partners on the Web, brands them and takes it back as an
integrated offering. These types of things have one-third of all retail stock trading activity and will have two-thirds in two years.
3. Value chains: Cisco Systems Inc. is a value chain where the Internet is the platform for the design of products. The products are designed by the Cisco business Web, not by Cisco.
It's a manufacturing company that doesn't make things. Cisco's products are sold on the Internet . Cisco's market cap is bigger than Ford and General Motors combined.
4. Self-organizing alliance: Linux would be a great example, [an operating system] developed by thousands of programmers who have never met and do it on a volunteer basis. You
could call them digital Rotarians. This operating system has 17 per cent of the server market now. What else could you build this way? Could you build a car without an auto
company? Could you build a jet without a Boeing? Airplanes are designed in cyberspace, so you don't need blueprints, wind tunnels or physical models any more. One executive said
that he views a 777 as a bunch of parts travelling together in formation. Of course, you need a place to assemble it but it could be a small piece of the value creation.
5. Distributive networks: where the old post office and power grids and telephone networks are being replaced by Internet -based distribution systems. Fedex is a distributive network
for logistics. You have companies like Enron striking terror into the hearts of any power executive because they can rapidly deploy global capabilities on the Internet to deliver power
and information.
The point in all this is that any business will be a business/Web mix with its roots in one of those five core types. What we are involved in at the alliance is rethinking business strategy
to move from a traditional corporation to building a business.
Q. Is Canada lagging in electronic commerce?
A. People who say Canada is way behind are mistaken. We were way behind but Canada is in the ballpark. We are No. 2 in terms of proliferation of home computers and Internet
access behind the U.S. The schools are moving slowly but, relative to other countries, it's not bad.
We lack the capital markets here to fund high-tech entrepreneurs, that's the biggest problem. People say there is more money chasing too few good ideas in Canada. From my
experience, this is dead wrong and completely false. Anybody who has money to invest and is serious should give me a call and I will give you the names of three Canadian start-ups
that could have a market cap of $1-billion in a year if they could get their first $5-million in funding.
Over all, in terms of our government embracing new technology, there are a number of quite important initiatives under way in municipalities, provincially and federally. The Canadian
government is very involved on the new initiative on the future of democracy.
Q. It's interesting that you mention democracy. How do you think the Internet changes politics?
A. We had a meeting at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard where we had government leaders from around the world. We are moving beyond how the Internet
can change the business of government, or the citizen as a consumer of government services and laws, to the nature of governance itself or the citizen as an owner of government.
This raises many issues regarding the nature of the democratic process and the relationship of citizen to state.
Nation states came out of national economies, the industrial revolution , the transition of feudalism and feudal kingdoms to capitalist, mercantile and industrial economies. It made a lot
of sense: the nation state built on national economies -- except now we have a global economy.
We are not very well organized on this shrinking planet to address our common concerns and needs. That is one of the issues the forum is looking at.
Q. We hear a lot about the digital divide, in which the gap between countries that are technically advanced and those that are not will widen. Is this a valid perspective?
A. First of all, there is a digital divide within every country and on a global basis between countries. In the developing world, it is worse than in most developed countries. We will see
some big surprises on this as some cultures that have great curiosity will leapfrog over others in Western Europe.
If you are not using [technology], you can't understand how it will change the world. It is personal use that is the preconditional for comprehension.
I see a huge thirst in Latin American countries and countries like Malaysia and Singapore that understand this revolution . Some of these countries will leap over other more developed
countries.
Having said that, we really do need a global campaign to close the digital divide. I have an awesome story about a group of Canadian teenagers organizing a global campaign so
every kid on the Earth has access to the Internet .
Many people say, 'Surely kids need clean water and food and health care and education before they need the Internet .' True enough, we could save tens of millions of lives just by
getting vaccinations to kids. But over time, this argument will become invalid because it is not the Internet versus these other social and economic needs. The Internet will become
the only way to deliver them. . . . These great social causes are all converging with the Net. This is a very important issue.
Q. What about children and the Internet ? You could make an argument that the Internet is an antisocial medium because you sit in front of a computer, making it a lot like video
games, rather than doing something outside like playing baseball with other children.
A. The Internet is a different kind of beast. It is the antithesis of the one-way media. It is a communications tool that does bring people together, not just virtually but physically.
If you look at kids and how they use the Internet in schools and home, they do it socially. They cluster around workstations or video games for that matter. The evidence does not
support this stereotype we have. In terms of how the children of the baby boomers spend their time in families that have on-line access, the main victim of time on-line is not hanging
out with friends, doing homework or learning the piano, it's TV.
TV took away 24 hours of the week for the baby boomers, and these kids are taking it back. When they are on-line, they are communicating, reading, telling their stories, authenticating,
judging information, criticizing, formulating opinions, building Websites, innovating. My research shows this is not isolating kids, it is doing the opposite.
Even in business, there is no evidence that the use of the Internet reduces face-to-face communications. If you structure it well, it reduces the bad things you want to get rid of such as
the routine monthly sales meeting which is stuff you could do on a video conference.
Q. What about the written word? Will the Internet kill it?
A. The written word will not go away. When we compose a sentence, we create a world and committing one's ideas to text is a critical part of cognition and essential to human
communications. I am reading a lot more because of the Internet , not less.
Q. Will non-English languages disappear because the Internet is primarily an English-dominated medium?
A. Right now, we are at an odd period because it sure helps to speak English on the Internet . Ten years from now or even five years from now with the power of immediate translation
systems, we can have our cake and eat it, too.
We can all communicate with each other around the world plus speak our own language. Some of these translation systems are a little primitive today. These are technical obstacles
and they tend to evaporate quite quickly. I am an optimist about the future of languages other than English precisely because of technology.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

25/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Q. Along the same lines as the digital divide, there is the issue of E-literacy or, in other words, the gap between those who use and have access to technology like computers and the
Internet and those who don't.
A. There is a graph in Growing Up Digital that shows family income versus access to computers in the home. The richest third have access, the middle third are getting it quite fast
and the bottom third is falling behind so that by the time they get access, they won't be kids any more.
To use the Internet effectively, you need to be literate and fluent in the technology. You need to know how to use search engines, you need services in the schools to use it effectively.
We need to rethink pedagogy, changing the relationship between the student and the teacher in the learning process.
In the home, you need parental support and structure and the communication of values and the negotiation of social contracts regarding issues like appropriate sites. This will not
happen by accident. We all need to get involved, every institution, not just governments, not just educators or the community leader or trade unionists.
Corporations have a huge role to play. We need to get involved as individuals. You can find a way. My son is going to a developing country for March break with 20 other kids from his
school. They are going to spend a week getting kids in Cuba wired, implementing technology in a community computing centre, showing kids how to use it.
You get involved in your kids' school, your community group. You turn your local library into an Internet centre, you change your company, you get involved in a political party, you get
unions to wake up and understand that technology is not a threat but the best thing to happen. If we design it properly, technology is the engine of jobs and quality of life, not the
opposite. If we do this in Canada, maybe this will be an age of promise fulfilled.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvbu01pzd

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

26/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

WHO TO WATCH
Report on Business

Media firm's chief looks beyond the Net HIGH-TECH GROWTH Digital Renaissance is labelled a multimedia firm, but finding
an exact definition of its business is difficult. Its president, Keith Kocho, believes his firm is more than just an 'Internet
company.'
TYLER HAMILTON
978 words
7 January 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B5
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- KEITH KOCHO Position: President of Digital Renaissance Inc.
What lies ahead: Mr. Kocho must continue to help his "transactive media" company grow despite criticism that his company has lost some of its focus.
Keith Kocho says the future of new media shouldn't depend exclusively on the growth of a single medium -- the Internet .
In fact, the president of Toronto-based Digital Renaissance Inc. prefers the term "transactive media" company -- instead of the blanket label " Internet company" -- when describing
the business he founded in 1991.
"The reason I say we're not necessarily an Internet company is that the Internet is just one distribution medium that we access to sell or distribute products," the 30-year-old
executive explains, just hours before receiving Ryerson Polytechnic University's first-ever distinguished alumni award.
Digital Renaissance is broadly labelled a multimedia or new media firm, but finding an exact definition of its business is difficult. To put it simply, the company takes corporate
marketing messages -- what it calls "stories" -- and brings them to life.
It often develops the content for those stories, but, more importantly, uses its own software to tailor that content for CD-ROMs, television, radio, newspapers and the Internet .
In this sense, the company is both a software and content developer.
"We're going to use broadcast, we're using print . Historically, we have stayed away from aligning ourselves with one particular medium."
While the World Wide Web , he says, represents a standard with which new media firms can develop products, he adds that it hasn't yet reached a point of maturity where companies
can "make money while they sleep" through royalties or licencing fees.
Instead, many new media companies have been trapped in this "catch-all" -- surviving by taking on experimental, one-off Internet projects for anyone who asks, but not being able to
use what they've learned from those projects to create more generic products with lasting appeal.
"The problem is the markets that we would sell into are not mature enough yet. Electronic commerce on the Web is not mature enough yet. So we've got to find ways of working within
traditional distribution channels, like television and print ."
He describes an industry where "cross-pollination" is taking place between new media companies and traditional media businesses, such as film production, telecommunications and
cable companies. The growth of his own company is a case in point.
Film and television producer Atlantis Communications Inc. of Toronto (which has since merged with Alliance Communications Corp.) bought a 10-per-cent interest in Digital
Renaissance in August, and plans to raise that stake to 20 per cent some time this year.
Mr. Kocho says that relationship will help Digital Renaissance build credibility and reach more traditional markets with its products.
Bell Canada in the past year also has built up a 20-per-cent interest in Digital Renaissance, which has been working closely with Bell's Emergis research and development division
and Bell's new satellite unit.
"Keith and his company represent a very valuable asset to BCE, from a variety of perspectives," says John MacDonald, president and chief executive officer of Bell Canada, a division
of Montreal-based BCE Inc. "Not only [through its] Web-based publishing model . . . but even from an entertainment standpoint."
And in December, Microsoft Corp. announced that Digital Renaissance was helping with its work in interactive television programming, which aims to provide news , stock quotes,
weather reports and other content in conjunction with programs through its Web TV service.
Microsoft said Digital Renaissance's TAG technology allows producers to create "relationships between programs and Web assets" by linking viewers to interactive Web content while
watching a television program.
All neat stuff to be sure, but not all observers are impressed by what Digital Renaissance is doing. Many, in fact, say they're not quite sure what the company is doing.
"My sense is Keith has lost some focus and gone off track a bit," says Rodger Campbell, vice-president of marketing at Toronto-based Cyberplex Inc., a Digital Renaissance
competitior.
Mr. Campbell adds that Digital Renaissance may be focusing too much on content and broadcasting, and not enough on servicing the needs of companies trying to jump on the
Internet .
Digital Renaissance has also been criticized for building a reputation based more on style and less on the substance of its products. A walk through its downtown building is more like
a tour of an art gallery or hip architectural firm than a technology company.
But Mr. Kocho defends the direction he's taking his company, and warns that it's not a good idea for the industry to throw all its eggs in the same Internet basket.
"If you look at Web companies and new media companies, their growth has always been tied to the idea that there would be some explosive take-off through CD-ROM distribution or
over the Web," he explains.
"What I'm saying is that kind of expansion might stand to happen across multiple media before any new one is going to displace it."
And on the style issue?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

27/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

"If I said anything other than there's got to be a lot more substance than style, I'd be crazy," he says, admitting at the same time that being perceived as "hip" helps attract good people.
"We definitely want to be comfortable, so there's no question we err on the side of creating a comfortable work environment. But let's be professional, and let's build a good business."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv17001yw

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

28/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Post-holiday shakeout awaits e-retailers --- Expect mergers and takeovers once dust settles --- Mutual Funds
Levi Folk and Richard Webb
886 words
29 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
BU02
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Jingle bells could be ringing to the tune of big profits this holiday season for investors in high tech and e-commerce funds.
The first so-called "e-Xmas" is shaping up to be a retailer's and a shopper's paradise. The advent of the year 2000, the strong economy, and increased consumer confidence are
sparking strong retail sales, while the emergence of the Internet as a viable alternative shopping medium is alleviating the headaches of parking, lineups and foot calluses.
While people can now do their Christmas shopping in their pajamas, the biggest laugh may be reserved for investors when the profits start rolling in - but it comes with a warning.
Of course, nothing in life is guaranteed, and this year's e-Xmas season is strewn with obstacles and warnings. This is the year that investors finally get to see a glimpse of the on-line
retailing revolution .
Expectations are high and questions abound. Will the Y2K bug put a crimp on sales? Will e-tailers be able to fill the orders? Will transactions be secure? Which companies will see a
return on their investment, especially after many of them blow their entire budget on the holiday advertising and promotion necessary to create a brand name? How many of them will
end up with lasting brand recognition?
The competition is fierce because the rewards are great. According to Internet trade organization shop.org, sales for the holiday season are expected to triple from last year to over $9
billion. Canadian retailers expect to sell $1.4 billion worth of merchandise over the Internet this year, double last year's figure. And most of the spending is coming from the so-called
Generation Y, Internet -savvy youngsters, teenagers and students who have grown up with a mouse in hand and have large amounts of disposable income, a key word for retailers.
And traditional retailers are not planning to be left out of the Web distribution channel. Brick-and-mortar companies are making strategic alliances with technology firms. Recently, WalMart and America Online linked forces while Microsoft became a partner for Best Buy stores.
Noah Blackstein, portfolio manager of Dynamic Power American fund, can certainly appreciate these relationships. While he doesn't own anything with a dot-com in it, he likes
companies that take advantage of the Internet with software and services.
"I like the retailing area, with the high disposable income Generation Y demographic trend," he says. Blackstein owns both Microsoft and AOL stock, which he calls the "dominant,
gorilla brand of the Internet ."
Salomon Smith Barney retail analyst Rick Church said in a recent interview that the more than 70 million Generation Y consumers, sometimes defined as "echo-boomers," represent a
powerful consumer group with a lot of purchasing power and they are using it. According to Church, the brands offered by the retailers, their advertising postures, the shopping
environments and the Internet initiatives are designed to attract this type of consumer. And while he thinks there are positive and negative aspects to Internet shopping, he says,
"there are some reasons to believe it can be successful."
Which firms become successful is a question still waiting to be decided. Internet retailers are doing some very bold and innovative things this season, from big-budget television ads to
electronic Christmas cards. The Gap Online is leading the way to bridging on-line shopping with reality by allowing gifts to be returned by mail or to any Gap store.
Many firms have literally staked their futures on this holiday season. Business Week magazine reports that Internet retailers are expected to spend over $1 billion on TV, print , radio
and billboard advertising this year and are hiring extra staff to accommodate the anticipated sales volumes.
Prominent Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Internet analyst Mary Meeker says investors have to wait until March before the dust settles and winners are revealed. That's when marketing
and promotion budgets run dry and investors will be able to see how much brand recognition remains. Explosive gains and steep losses are both possible outcomes at this stage,
including a rash of mergers and acquisitions as the successful companies round up the cash-starved runners-up.
Investors cannot be expected to be patient forever. They have justified high valuations for Internet stocks based on their future promise, but for many companies the future promise
is now. Christmas 1999 is a benchmark and this spring investors are expected to punish failure harshly.
Ian Ainsworth, Fund Manager of the Year 1999 award winner and manager of the Altamira e-business fund, knows all about the spring woes. Last year he avoided a similar downturn
when he moved his holdings away from e-tailers and into cash.
There are no guarantees in this risky sector but expectations are high, consumer spending is strong and on-line sales are a high-profile illustration of the e-commerce revolution . It
is a part of the Internet that needs to start working sooner rather than later.
--The authors are the editors of the Fund Counsel, a Toronto-based investment newsletter, and can be reached on the Internet at www .fundcounsel.com [http://www.fundcounsel.com/]
Document tor0000020010830dvct01bb0

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

29/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Bone up on your Net knowledge
The Toronto Star
1168 words
16 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
There is never a shortage of new Internet book titles. The publishing industry is grinding them out faster than the trends themselves. Here's some last minute gift ideas for the geeks in
your life.
Internet And World Wide Web Simplified, (IDG Books), $24.95.
The perfect book for the absolute beginner. Yeah, and you know who I'm talking about, you technophobes. Big full-color glossy book from marangraphics. There are still millions out
there who haven't made the plunge into cyberspace. These kind of user-friendly beginner books remain invaluable.
The Whole Internet , by Kiersten Conner-Sax & Ed Krol, (O'Reilly), $36.95.
If you use the Net, but want to improve your understanding of it, this book is the "next stage up" from the previous book. This venerable old "overview of the Net" book dates back to
1992. But it's been updated for modern times. It tackles the whole online experience: how to play audio files, deal with spam, write your own Web pages, how to save money on long
distance charges by use the Net as a phone, playing games online , and even dealing with stocks. A well-rounded reference volume to keep beside your monitor.
The Software Conspiracy, by Mark Minasi (McGraw Hill), $36.95.
For some reason, the public demands less from software than virtually any other product. People who buy it simply accept that it will mess up their lives now and then. Author Mark
Minasi says this magnitude of negligence and ineptitude would result in a flood of government intervention and civil law suits in any other economic sector.
Some 90 per cent of software "bugs" (a cute term for "defect") that users discover are known to vendors before the products are shipped. But they ship it anyway. And then blame you
for it.
The book is loaded with examples of the damage crap software can cause - yes, including a few deaths (of mission critical applications, so don't worry, no one's died from installing
Windows yet).
It's an important book in that it could organize the kind of consumer protection crusade Ralph Nader made famous in fighting the auto industry.
Weaving The Web, by Tim Berners-Lee with Mark Fischetti, (Harper San Francisco).
Tim Berners-Lee "invented" the Web. Not bad, huh? That's like being the person who "invented" paper.
It started as a white paper for CERN particle physics lab in Switzerland in 1989. Berners-Lee gives an insider look at the rise of the Web browser, Netscape and the World Wide Web
Consortium (w3.org). Too many Internet histories act like it all began in 1993 - when the Net was "opened for business" by Clinton-Gore.
This is a thinker's book. You don't get tips on using a Web browser or building Web sites. Just like Einstein understood the bits-and-pieces about time and space, but wrote about
humanity and its future , so Berners-Lee understands the bits-and-pieces of the Web, but writes about humanity and its future .
I dislike exaggerated comparisons, like making comparisons to Einstein. But the changes in the way we think that each man set in motion may end up being equal in magnitude.
Windows 98 In A Nutshell, by Tim O'Reilly, Troy Mott & Walter Glenn (O'Reilly), $36.95.
Ever heard claim that "humans only use 5 per cent of their brain"? I don't know if that's scientifically demonstrable or not, but it is probably true that humans only use about 5 per cent of
their Windows operating system! Face it - you all just slap it in there, find a couple of buttons you like, and that's it. You people know who you are. Don't make me come out there. Read
this book and discover the rest of your operating system brain.
UNIX Secrets, by James C. Armstrong, Jr. (IDG Books), $59.99.
UNIX didn't earn its sobriquet of "the world's least intuitive operating system" for nothing! Yes it's big. Yes it's powerful. And yes it don't come easy. But it's worth it. If you have an
interest in computers, learn UNIX. Find out what the free UNIXes - Linux and FreeBSD - can really do. The book is made up of readable, bite-sized chapters, dealing with things like
shells, file systems, e-mail and Web servers. It comes with a CD containing the Linux operating system kernel. A good place for the non-beginner to start.
Competing In The Age Of Digital Convergence, edited by David B. Yoffie (Harvard Business School Press), $64.95.
Harvard makes some of the most interesting Internet business books out there. They are intellectually challenging and they rigorously analyze the way the Net is remaking our society
and economy. The volume is an overview of "convergence." Convergence means that day in the not too distant future when all our media will interact - TV, phone, computer, whatever,
they will not be separate from each other. The Web has attempted to be this "convergence" media, but is having some problems in the cradle. This collection of academic essays from
Harvard and Berkeley et al, intelligently tackles this exciting 21st century problem and opportunity.
The Internet Bubble, by Anthony B. Perkins & Michael C. Perkins, (Harper Business).
One day, the "Net stock lust" will ebb. That maddening desire for Internet -related stocks will pause.
Millions of individual traders will suddenly realize the stock price of these companies has flattened out. Left holding stock that no longer increases $20 a share in a day, investors will
realize they'd get better returns renting a pick-up truck and driving along the highways looking for returnable bottles.
Then, the nightmare begins. The great sell-off.
That's what this book's all about. The Internet Bubble compiled a list of companies that have gone public since Netscape started the mania back in 1995.
Of the 133 companies, only 22 are making profit at all right now. The book asserts these companies are collectively over-valued by $230 billion U.S. When the meltdown comes,
individuals holding them will be hammered for value declines of 50 per cent and more.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

30/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

And make no mistake: SOMEONE has to lose. Everyone can't get out "just in time." Those caught holding the bag will be stuck with huge losses - or be forced to keep positions in
companies that require something like 80 per cent annual growth over five years to make the original investment worthwhile. (And, gosh, that happens so often.)
This book's a necessary antidote to the hype surrounding Net-related stocks. Read it.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
NET ASSETS: Books on the , such as Weaving The Web, by Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee, should be a welcome addition to your favourite geek's library.
Document tor0000020010830dvcg019kl

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

31/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

MARKETING
Report on Business: Managing

Agencies look to mine U.S. dot.com advertising rush As on-line companies eagerly spend billions south of the border to
stand out from the cybercrowd, the industry here hopes the boom will hit Canada.
JOHN HEINZL
988 words
22 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
M1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Open a U.S. newspaper or tune in CNN, and they jump out at you: Dozens of ads for fledgling dot.com companies, each trying to establish itself as the leading brand in its corner of
the E-commerce universe.
There are dot.com ads on billboards, in magazines and on giant banners dragged by airplanes. For next January's Super Bowl on ABC, more than a dozen on-line companies have
bought commercial time.
Madison Avenue is enjoying a dot.com gold rush bigger than anything the ad industry has seen before. "Spectacular," Fortune magazine declares. An "advertising explosion,"
Advertising Age says.
So what does this mean for Canada? With billions pouring into U.S. ad agencies and media outlets, things must be booming here, too, right?
Well, no. Not yet, anyway.
"It's a steamroller in the states right now," says John Harding, president of the Radio Marketing Bureau, which promotes radio as an advertising medium. In Canada, he says, "it's a
tractor-trailer that's pulling out of the driveway, still in first gear."
That's not to say Canada doesn't have lots of dot.com , er, dot.ca ads. Web sites such as chapters.ca, indigo.ca and futureshop .ca are all advertising aggressively, especially with
the holiday season approaching. It's rare to find an ad agency that doesn't have at least one client gearing up to sell cheese or nuclear submarines over the Internet .
But the level of dot.com marketing in Canada pales next to the orgy in the United States, where Internet companies are expected to spend an estimated $2-billion (U.S.) to $4-billion
on advertising this year. In Canada, the value of dot.com advertising is estimated in the tens of millions.
Will the boom hit Canada? Ad industry people hope so, but they say it could take a year or two. "It's sort of like you're standing on a train track and you can hear the rumbling coming,"
says Chris Staples, who recently left Vancouver-based Palmer Jarvis DDB with two colleagues to start an agency called Rethink. Mr. Staples has reason to be optimistic: His shop
already has signed up four Internet -based clients and talked to several more.
Domenic Caruso, president of MacLaren McCann Canada Inc., also sees a bright future for dot.com advertising in Canada. "We definitely are interested in this area. We see it as a
growth business and one where branding is incredibly important," he says.
But he expects to see a shakeout in the U.S. marketplace that will leave only the strongest players standing.
For the Canadian ad industry, the danger is that the shakeout will happen before the boom even arrives here. Indeed, much of the U.S. advertising is geared as much to Wall Street as
to Main Street, as Internet companies try to attract investor attention with splashy campaigns.
If sentiment turns against the dot.coms -- and there are plenty of signs that is already happening -- the ramifications for Canada's ad industry aren't good.
"I think Wall Street will get hip to the hype," says Sunni Boot, president of media buyer Optimedia Canada Inc. in Toronto. "I think you're going to see it actually tapering off in the U.S., I
really do."
Canada's advertising and media industries won't experience a dot.com boom or bust, she predicts, but something in between. The level of advertising will increase slowly and steadily
as more companies, including bricks and mortar retailers, create an on-line presence, she says.
These companies will have to build their brands, and that bodes well for Canada's media industries, she says. But, she adds, it will be "completely different from what we're seeing in
the states."
Others say it's only a matter of time before Canada is hit by its own frenzy. "We, in the last 30 days, have gotten more phone calls from dot.com companies interested in our media
services than I thought would be possible," says Scott Neslund, managing director in the Toronto office of Starcom, the media buying unit of ad agency Leo Burnett.
One reason Canada has lagged the United States is that U.S. Internet companies want to establish a presence in their home market before heading north. But many companies are
building Canada into their business plans for the next one or two years, he says. For that reason, Starcom is advising clients to place their media buys early to avoid the expected rush,
he says.
Dot.com companies themselves also see plenty of room for growth in advertising here. "I think we are nowhere near the saturation point for dot.com advertising in the off-line world,"
says Vida Morkunas, group manager for Internet marketing at futureshop .ca. Burnaby, B.C.-based Future Shop Ltd. launched a national ad campaign for its Web site in October.
With Canada still relatively quiet compared with the United States, now is a good time to build an Internet brand, on-line retailers say. South of the border, so many Web sites are
fighting for attention that consumers are having trouble telling them apart. That is forcing them to spend even more on ads, many of which use shock humour and other gimmicks to
stand out.
That's not the case in Canada -- yet.
"We believe now is going to be the least expensive time to find and attract customers," says David Hainline, executive vice-president of merchandising and marketing at Chapters
Online Inc. in Toronto. "As the noise intensifies . . . it's going to get harder and harder and more expensive."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvbm01odt

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

32/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Net's `Dot Com Effect' in full bloom
The Toronto Star
809 words
16 September 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
I know a man who sold an Internet domain name for over $200,000 U.S.
Think about that. All for the "ownership" (in reality, the licencing) of a tiny bit of intellectual property. It's ludicrous, but it's all part of the windfall nature of the Net itself.
These kinds of big buck purchases happen because of the way the Internet domain name system was set-up. It creates an artificial scarcity.
Domain names have different components, the most important of which are the "first level" (the .com part) and the "second level" (the part before the .com). Everyone wants to own an
appropriate and marketing-powerful second level domain. For instance, McDonald's restaurants obviously wants mcdonalds.com. But so does every other business named McDonalds
in the world.
Because there are so few first level domains, it makes those second level names very scarce. Aside from "regional" first level hierarchies - .ca for Canada, .jp for Japan, .de for
Germany, etc. - the main first levels for the business world are .com and .net. The distribution of .com and .net is mainly handled by Network Solutions Inc., in Virginia - it has over five
million registrations.
Thus, for all the businesses in the world, there are really only two options: mybusiness.com and mybusiness.net. And it's first-come, first-served. That makes them potentially very
expensive.
It's this paucity of "namespace" that creates the corporate feeding frenzy for certain domain names - which can be grabbed for $35 U.S. a year.
The scarcity may eventually disappear. Some people aim to "open up" the name game. One idea is to add more first level domains - you'll also have .biz or .shop, etc. Another notion is
to just get rid of the first level itself - so you could be called http://toronto [http://toronto] or http://toronto.ontario [http://toronto.ontario], etc.
Meanwhile, these big buck sales of domain names have contributed to the perception that .com is a sexy business term in itself. A new Purdue University study shows that any
company that adds a Dot Com (.com) to its name becomes "more valuable" in the mind of most people. In particular, investors will give you more money if you tag a Dot Com on your
company name.
The survey monitored 52 publicly traded businesses that initiated a Net-related name change in the period of June, 1998, to March, 1999. It says there weren't any Dot Com
changes before June, 1998. Since then, an average of five publicly traded businesses have cyber-shifted their names per month. (Most just added a .com, though some added a .net
or simply inserted the word Internet ).
The university study - called "A Rose.com by Any Other Name" - says that there's a real Dot Com Effect in action today. On average, companies that went the Dot Com route saw
their stock price rise 125 per cent in the period from its price five days before the change to five days after.
Fifteen days after the name change , the average price per share of the companies surveyed rose from $2.15 to $5.86. The average trading volume more than quadrupled, from
14,124 to 66,500 shares.
Some sort of Pavlovian drool response.
The biggest pump comes when non- Internet companies suddenly embrace the Net. These kinds of businesses saw stock prices jump 189 per cent during the first 30 days. (This
underscores the fact that 1999 will probably be remembered as the year bricks-and-mortar operations attained dominance over media-darling, garage-start-up companies - things like
Amazon.Com or Netscape.)
That's why you get Courtleigh Capital Inc. transforming into Stockup.com Inc., Comgen Corp. reborn as Planet411.com Corp., and the New York Bagel Exchange Inc. emerging from
the cocoon as Web4boats.com Inc.
So step up to the trough, gang. While you can. Eventually the Dot Com Effect will fade. After all, once every company is fully online , it won't be anything noteworthy. Investors will not
reward the onliners but, instead, punish the laggards.
Until then, though, rename your funeral home CantTakeItWithYou.Com and use the resultant market capitalization bloat to go buy TimeWarner or CBS something. Something with real
assets so that when the Internet bubble bursts, you still have something more than a fond memory of your market cap.
(Note to editor: I'd like to point out that I am not just K.K. Campbell, I am also KKCampbell.Com. Forthwith, I expect this newspaper to pay me 125 per cent more for this, and all
subsequent, columns. Thanks.)
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist .
xxxxx xxxxxxxx: xxx xxxxxxxx Web sites like CitySearch will be the successfule-commerce model of the .
Document tor0000020010830dv9g00xtj

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

33/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Digital democracy The Web is casting its influence over political campaigns, but a defining moment has yet to arrive
Mark Evans
2105 words
3 June 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- Tax cuts and health care have defined the Ontario election, but scratch the surface and what emerges is a fascinating peek at how the Web is starting to change the rules of
the political game.
The "Dalton Cam" claimed to offer a video diary of Liberal Leader Dalton McGuinty's campaign. Instead, people who visit Mr. McGuinty's Web site -- ( www .daltonmcguinty.com
[http://www.daltonmcguinty.com/]) -- get only a still image of the party's headquarters. Unfortunately, the only excitement caught by the camera has been campaign workers walking
through a non-descript office as they prepared for today's election.
Still, the Dalton Cam demonstrates that political parties believe the Web is a potentially powerful way to win over voters. And there are already signs that it will change the political
process, just as radio and television did in their early days.
Aneurin Bosley, a senior partner with Axiomatikos Corp., an Ottawa-based on-line consulting and development firm, says the Internet could foster close ties between politicians and
their constituents by providing easier ways to communicate, exchange and discuss issues.
"I think politicians have lost touch with the rest of us -- the Joe voting-public," he says. "The Internet has the capability to try and re-establish the relationship and allow politicians to
get reacquainted with us."
For the most part, however, the Internet is being used merely to produce electronic pamphlets.
But there's little doubt that political parties believe it has huge potential as a way to directly target voters and to deliver messages that aren't filtered by the media or special interest
groups.
Robert Richardson, a senior vice-president with market research firm Angus Reid Group, says the Internet has promise as a political tool, but it is limited by the fact that it has yet to
become a mainstream medium.
"I would describe the Internet as a political weapon of the future ," he said. "It's an important political tool but not an important mass political tool."
The Internet 's status as an upstanding member of the media family may not be far off. Sales of personal computers worldwide now rival those of televisions, and about half of
Canadian households now have a PC.
"We are at the stage where personal computers are starting to be the next phase of mass communications," says Mr. Richardson, who was chief of staff for former Ontario Liberal
leader Lyn McLeod from 1992 to 1995.
"But people still look to the Internet for news , information on technology, weather and entertainment as opposed to a vehicle for political discourse."
Some political parties disagree, saying an on-line presence is already an integral part of campaigning in 1999.
"In 1995, it was almost cutting edge to have a campaign Web site," says Dean Williams, a spokesman with the Ontario New Democratic Party. "Four years later, if you don't have a
Web site, you're in the Stone Age."
The Internet 's development as an election tool is particularly intriguing when viewed in the context of television and radio.
Television, for example, came into its own as a major political force on Sept. 26, 1960, when John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon took part in the first of four televised debates during
the 1960 U.S. presidential election. Although primary debates were broadcast on television in 1956, the Kennedy-Nixon match was the first broadcast of a face-off between the
Democratic and Republican presidential nominees.
Mr. Kennedy's strong performance on television gave his campaign momentum in a tight race that he went on to win, even though some people believed Mr. Nixon came across better
on radio, which had been the dominant medium for nearly half a century.
But there has yet to be such a defining moment for the Internet 's role in politics.
So far, it has proven to be more valuable to political parties as an internal communications tool than as a mass market organism.
All three of Ontario's major political parties have internal Web sites where candidates and campaign workers can access information about strategic issues, new policies and the
movement of their leaders in the province. More importantly, E-mail has replaced faxes as a way to share information and answer media questions.
For voters and political junkies, the Internet offers a wealth of information as campaigning parties happily post everything from policy papers to press releases. Most sites have lots of
content to inform and entertain visitors. And, or course, every party claims that their sites attract lots of traffic.
Mr. Bosley, the consultant, says the Internet 's information base has the potential to defuse the inflammatory political rhetoric cited by author John Ralston Saul in his book Reflections
of a Siamese Twin.
Mr. Saul's thesis is that politicians can easily prey upon people's insecurities rather than engaging them in intellectual discourse. By providing access to all kinds of information, the
Internet gives voters the ability to rise above the political fray and determine their own views.
But the Internet is full of inflammatory rhetoric about the Ontario election. Just take a look at www .notuptothejob.com [http://www.notuptothejob.com/]-- which, ironically, is hosted by
Mr. Bosley's Internet firm. The saucy site, maintained by the Ontario Progressive Conservative Party, takes direct aim at Mr. McGuinty, slamming the Liberal Leader for his alleged
indecisiveness.
Like many early-stage activities on the Internet , most political communication is not very interactive. People can visit political sites to get information, but there are few opportunities for
on-line dialogue.
The political parties in Ontario have done, at best, a mediocre job of tracking visitors who could be contacted later to encourage their support or solicit donations, says Mr. Richardson,
the former Liberal staffer.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

34/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

To more effectively communicate with voters, he says, political parties will have to consider new forums such as dedicated Web sites, where voters can ask questions and have them
answered within a short period of time, and chat rooms where people can exchange ideas and on-line questionnaires.
He's also keen on the idea of "live and interactive" campaigns where party leaders are followed extensively so people can check a Web site and see what they are doing throughout the
day.
"That's probably the next stage, so you have an opportunity, unfiltered by the media, to see a campaign move across the province live," Mr. Richardson says. "The Liberals are trying
this a little with the Dalton Cam but that's really just a camera in their headquarters watching the paint dry."
One of the most creative users of the Internet has been Camille Theriault, the leader of the Liberal Party in New Brunswick. For the provincial election campaign that ends Monday, he
has conducted an on-line chat with students at the New Brunswick Community College's campuses in Miramichi, Woodstock, Dieppe and Campbellton.
The on-line discussion was both a political move to reach out to "wired" younger voters and an attempt by the New Brunswick government to show commitment to the "new economy."
Back in Ontario, the public battles between Mr. McGuinty, Ontario Premier Mike Harris and New Democratic Party Leader Howard Hampton have become nastier as the election
campaign rumbles to a close. In the background, a fascinating electronic fight has been waged on the Internet .
In behaviour that involves equal doses of humour, skullduggery and questionable ethics, the Liberals and Conservatives have been snapping up domain names and putting up
"colourful" Web sites.
The Tory Web site, www .notuptothejob.com [http://www.notuptothejob.com/], is one of the most flamboyant examples, but not the only one.
The Liberals, for example, bought www .mikeharris.com [http://www.mikeharris.com/] for $50,000 in July, 1998. People who visit the site are told that it offers information about
Conservative policies and Mr. Harris's record as premier. Needless to say, it does not paint a pretty picture of the four-year Conservative reign.
The Conservatives have countered with another cheeky site www .liberalsforharris.com [http://www.liberalsforharris.com/] of their own. The site is billed as a place where Liberal
supporters who are "dissatisfied with Dalton McGuinty's weak leadership" can find political salvation by switching their support to Mr. Harris.
The site also features a large Liberal party logo.
Paul Rhodes, a senior media advisor with the Ontario PC Party, says the domain war is getting out of hand. He says voters may be confused by Web sites that feature the logos of one
party but, in reality, are operated by a rival.
"When does it become misrepresentation," he asks. "I take these things very seriously because if the Internet wants to be treated like every other media, there has to be accepted
guidelines on what's appropriate and what's not."
While the "Web wars" among Ontario's political parties have added some spice to a nasty election campaign, they've paled compared with what's happening in the United States -where Web warfare has become serious -- and serious business.
Texas Governor George W. Bush, who is considering a run at the U.S. presidency, has found himself in the middle of a domain controversy.
In an effort to counter the moves of domain capitalists, Mr. Bush's senior campaign advisor, Karl Rove, registered 200 domain names last year, including www .bushsucks.com
[http://www.bushsucks.com/] and www .bushblows.com [http://www.bushblows.com/], to counter any moves by anti-Bush critics.
That hasn't stopped Zack Exley, a computer consultant in Massachusetts, from trying to make a few bucks by registering www .gwbush.com [http://www.gwbush.com/] and
www .gwbush.org [http://www.gwbush.org/].
Mr. Exley offered to sell the sites to Mr. Bush for $350,000 (U.S.). That offer was turned down.
The Internet 's biggest impact in the Ontario election may have been on the environmental front -- ironically not a campaign priority for any of the major parties -- in that it's reduced the
amount of paper used to print party policies and candidate pamphlets.
The Ontario PC Party, for example, says it printed 1.4 million copies of its party platform this year, compared with two million in 1995.
Site seeing
www .ontarioliberal.com [http://www.ontarioliberal.com/] www .OntarioPC.on.ca [http://www.OntarioPC.on.ca/] www .ontariondp.on.ca [http://www.ontariondp.on.ca/]
www .greenparty.on.ca [http://www.greenparty.on.ca/] www .nblib.nb.ca [http://www.nblib.nb.ca/]
WHAT A TANGLED WEB THEY SPIN
What you see isn't always you get when it comes to World Wide Web sites related to Canadian politics. Here's a sampling of such sites and who really owns them:
www .liberalsforharris.com [http://www.liberalsforharris.com/] Registered: May 22, 1999, by the Ontario PCs Description: Operated by the PCs, the site promotes itself as a place for
"former Liberals who are switching their support to Mike Harris because they are dissatisfied with [Liberal Leader] Dalton McGuinty's weak leadership."
www .mikeharris.com [http://www.mikeharris.com/] Registered: July 12, 1998, and purchased by the Ontario Liberal Party for a reported $50,000. Description: The site provides
information on the policies of Ontario's Conservative government and Premier Mike Harris's record. Naturally, it does not offer a positive portrayal of Mr. Harris's regime.
www .howardhampton.com [http://www.howardhampton.com/] Registered: May 21, 1999 by Bob Allisat Description: Mr. Allisat, who identified himself as "Howard for Union Stoodge
[sic] for Life" when he registered the site, is using it to sharply criticize all three major Ontario political parties for their lack of environmental vision.
www .lucienbouchard.com [http://www.lucienbouchard.com/] Registered: April 3, 1998, by Compton, Que.-based CyberExpress Inc. Description: The site features on-line classified ads
and makes no mention of Parti Quebecois Leader Lucien Bouchard.
www .jeanchretien.com [http://www.jeanchretien.com/] Registered: March 19, 1997, by Las Vegas-based The Jean Club Description: The site, Celebrity 1000, lets visitors vote for their
favourite celebrities. You can't, however, vote for your favourite politician.
www .pierretrudeau.com [http://www.pierretrudeau.com/] and www .brianmulroney.com [http://www.brianmulroney.com/]
Registered: July 17, 1997, by Friend to Friend Foundation of Lenexa, Kan.
Description: Both names are owned by a charitable trust that has registered the names of more than 300 celebrities, and offers them back to their rightful owners for a donation.
Registered: June 19, 1998, by Toronto-based Competitor Communications Inc. Description: Reform Party leader Preston Manning will have to sit down with Competitor to get his name
back. Competitor, which also owns the domain names www .curtisjoseph.com [http://www.curtisjoseph.com/] and www .bobbyhull.com [http://www.bobbyhull.com/], does the Internet
development work for the federal New Democratic Party.
CORRECTION

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

35/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The Web site www .mikeharris.com [http://www.mikeharris.com/] was donated to the Liberal Party of Ontario. Incorrect information was published in the Technology section yesterday.
(Friday, June 4, 1999) (Page B2)
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv6300t77

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

36/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Seattle battle showed Internet's populist power --- Web brought together WTO protesters, now tells their stories minus media
filter
Stuart Laidlaw
1359 words
20 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
BU01
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

The Battle in Seattle is becoming a revolution on the Internet .
Dozens of Web sites - featuring everything from personal stories of police brutality to chat rooms, photographs and even video - have sprung up on the Internet from around the world.
"It's nothing short of an information revolution ," says Robin Ellis, a 21-year-old Toronto woman who was in Seattle for the World Trade Organization protests two weeks ago and has
been reliving the protest almost daily via the Internet .
All this activity has put a 1990s twist on the 1960s-style protest that featured violent clashes between police and protestors, many of them counterculture dropouts who protested the
trade talks by handing out flowers, dancing in the streets and chanting slogans.
"They're using the same chants we did in '68," 54-year-old Mark Sommers said in Seattle at the height of the protests, adding they reminded him of the similarly violent 1968
Democratic national convention.
With one important difference - the Seattle protesters were much more organized.
"It's the Internet ," he said. "These kids are on the Internet and they're e-mailing each other all the time."
That meant that by the time the thousands of protesters arrived in Seattle in bus, car and plane, they all knew "what they're supposed to do."
Protest groups also used the Internet and e-mail for months leading up to the talks to organize demonstrations, solicit support and find accommodations for protesters going to Seattle
Once in Seattle, those protesters were able shut down the World Trade Talks for two days by refusing to let delegates into the talks.
And now, the protesters and others are using the Internet to tell the world their versions of what went on in Seattle.
Ellis, a student at the University of Regina, has been using the Internet since she got home to find out what happened at parts of the massive protests she missed, and to see how
others are interpreting it all.
So has her mom, a long-time activist who didn't go to Seattle but is fascinated by how the protest continues to live via the Net.
"I didn't feel I really knew what (Robin) was facing," says Lisa Dale, 47, who has never spent as much time on the Internet as she has since Seattle.
Friends and family have been e-mailing her with so many Web site addresses she hasn't been able to keep up with them all.
Her interest goes far beyond a mother's curiousity: She's president of the Women and Environmentalists Education and Development activist group.
Dale sees Seattle as a watershed for activists who have taken the traditional 1960s-style protests to new levels with the help of modern technology.
"Until the Internet came along, we have not really known how to keep in touch with each other," she says.
Her daughter agrees.
"I had felt kind of alone," Ellis says, but has felt better since finding others through the Internet who share her fear and anger over police use of tear gas and batons.
So far, Ellis has concentrated on Web sites containing diaries and first-person accounts of the protests, as well as newspaper and magazine clippings.
There are also dozens of sites featuring photographs and videos that allow viewers to see the whole sequence of events - including one where you can watch a series of still photos
shot from a roof top that document how, over a three-hour period two weeks ago, a peaceful street corner turned violent.
Viewers can judge for themselves in a way that they can't from the short clips used on television newscasts.
And more information is being added on the internet every day, keeping the protest alive long after everyone has gone home and the broken glass has been replaced.
"There's a dialogue going on that has never taken place before," says Ellis's mother Lisa Dale, a long-time Toronto activist.
Jesse Hirsh, a Toronto computer technician, was helping set up Web sites on Seattle within hours of the big Nov. 30 protests. He believes the Internet came of age as a source for
news with its coverage of the demonstrations.
"The Gulf War made CNN and Nov. 30 made the Internet ," says Hirsh.
The 25-year-old worked via e-mail with technicians in Seattle, Australia and Colorado to get images on the World Wide Web within hours of the protests.
Protesters with digital cameras handed over their pictures to the Seattle technician, who loaded them onto a Web site as Hirsh and the other technicians kept the site from crashing
under the weight of heavy Internet traffic.
"Everyone underestimated the interest in all this," says Hirsh.
Hirsh began working on a CD-ROM version of the protest videos after the Web site crashed a few times. He works for a volunteer organization that sets up Web sites for activists
groups, and the CD will be given out to them.
He said the server he uses has been too busy solving systems problems related to the heavy Internet traffic since the protests to count how many hits they have had on the site the
past two weeks.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

37/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Two years ago, Hirsh says, none of this would have happened because few people would have thought to take digital cameras to a protest - allowing the creation of instantaneous
pictures - and few people would have been turning to the Internet automatically for information.
It's all democracy in action, says Liss Jeffrey, an Internet analyst at the University of Toronto's McLuhan Program.
"Seattle provides a concrete example of what the Internet can do," she says, adding no other medium can get so much information out to so many people as fast as the Internet .
"This medium is proving to be a very powerful tool."
So far, it's been activist groups, with their younger media-savvy membership, who have been most adept at using the Internet , both to organize protests and to analyze and tell people
about them afterward, she says.
That means that it's been mostly the activists' analysis of the events in Seattle that have permeated the Internet coverage, she says.
"This is not just the magic box opening to the unvarnished truth," she says.
It's not just an issue with leftist groups pushing their ideas on the Internet , she says, adding that corporate sites can sometimes read more like infomercials on television than sources
of news .
The true test of the Internet 's role in a democracy, she says, will be how well it can be used to come up with contructive ideas for solving problems, rather than being used a forum for
protest and criticism. "It's easier to mobilize against something," she says.
Several sites contain hotlinks which, with a click of the mouse, provide details about upcoming protests.
The next big protest is expected to be in Montreal in January as the same countries that met in Seattle gather to discuss trade in genetically modified food.
Other sites encourage Web surfers to submit their pictures or thoughts on the Seattle protests.
The sites range from home-made Web sites - sort of personal photo albums posted on the Internet - to collections from mainstream news outlets, to Web sites by protest groups that
were part of the demonstrations.
The American Civil Liberties Association has also gotten in on the action, with a Web site where protesters can lodge complaints against the police. It's all part of the association's push
for an inquiry into how police handled the demonstrations.
At another more light-hearted site you can send an e-mail Christmas card featuring Seattle police in riot gear framed by images of holly, ivy and a message reading, "Merry Christmas
from Seattle."
GREETINGS: An e-mail Christmas card showing Seattle police in riot gear framed by images of holly, ivy , and a message reading, "Merry Christmas from Seattle" can be sent by surfers.
Document tor0000020010830dvck01at5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

38/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Multimedia --- How-to videos latest trend on Web
Dick Satran
793 words
28 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

SAN FRANCISCO - What will be on the menu when the world wide wait finally ends and high-speed Internet access arrives? Truffles, caviar, lobster, filet mignon, herb-rubbed
Colorado lamb, perhaps a bottle of Cabernet?
That's what Gourmetmarket.com already provides over its Web site shopping service ( www .gourmetmarket.com [http://www.gourmetmarket.com/]). But the company plans to serve its
gourmet menu with a multimedia twist in the new world of no-waiting Internet service.
The San Francisco-based service this week completed a pact with cable-modem giant AtHome Corp. to offer videos over the Internet on how to prepare gourmet dinners, along with
"virtual tours" of the regions where the foods and wines come from.
But hang on to those cookbooks. The new look is still just a promise for most people.
Cable modems are expected to be rolled out to millions of users in the next few years, but Internet experts are skeptical that a service relying heavily on video will work very well.
"There is a question of how well cable TV networks like AtHome can deliver content quickly to a lot of users at once," said Gene Shklar of Keynote Systems Inc., which measures the
performance of Internet systems.
Cable modems can push data over the Internet at a top rate of almost 3 megabits (3 million bits of data) per second, which is more than enough to transmit gourmet-cooking videos to
Internet users.
But in a test of AtHome's system in Dublin, Calif., one of the first in northern California, Keynote found a system operating far below peak, delivering Web pages more slowly than
telephone-based digital subscriber lines with one-tenth the peak speed of cable modems. That's because they slow down with every user added to the system, since all are sharing
the same line.
AtHome's vice-president for marketing, Charles Moldow, conceded the system isn't ready to broadcast video to large numbers of users, but said a technology fix is imminent. AtHome
has a deal with Internet multimedia company RealNetworks of Redmond, Wash., to provide a streaming video system for cable modems.
Consumer demand for multimedia services is picking up, and music downloads and video clips are among the fastest-growing sectors of the World Wide Web . Net content now is
mostly text and pictures, but the trend to so-called "rich media" will accelerate when the network's capacity grows.
"It's incredibly important to us that we have products like Gourmetmarket's that use `rich media,' " Moldow said. "People are going to be paying $40 a month for our service, and we
have to have that as a way to show the power of the network, so we can differentiate ourselves."
Gourmetmarket.com is certainly ready to provide the "rich" stuff, from chocolate tortes to white truffles to fine wines. But so do a lot of other online sites. Gourmetmarket hopes its
video will make it stand out from the pack.
"We can provide the text and sound and video of everything people want to know about gourmet cooking," said Andrew Friedland, Gourmetmarket.com vice-president of business
development.
"You can have a video with a famous chef telling you how to prepare something . . . or order some of the ingredients as you're getting ready to make it," Friedland said.
Gourmetmarket.com has entered joint-venture partnerships with Arome Interactive and Great Chefs Television to provide the content of television shows, CD-ROMs and videos about
foods and cooking.
"We see a revolution in the way people shop for food and wine," said Friedland. "They can't pick it up or touch it like they might do in a market. But we can offer elements to the
shopping experience that they can't get anywhere else."
AtHome, too, is preparing for this " revolution ." Moldow said AtHome is building a library of "how to" videos that can be downloaded.
Right now, those services are accessible only via the AtHome service, which has reached only 500,000 of the estimated 40 million home Internet users. But AtHome is considering
listing some of the content with the company's Excite search service in an attempt to boost demand among the Internet 's "power users" for rich media dealing with gourmet cooking,
finance, computers, real estate and other sectors.
News on demand has been the biggest area for video retrievals on the AtHome system. Movie trailers are another favourite, and "just searching for things" is also popular, Moldow
said. Home shopping that uses rich media is still at an early stage. But already television-shopping operations such as QVC and Home Shopping Network are making deals with
online services.
Document tor0000020010830dv5s00gxc

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

39/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Home videos Tired of the late-night stroll to your video store? Then get ready for the blockbuster technology of video on
demand, which will deliver your choice of feature films through a high-speed line to your television.
TYLER HAMILTON
2063 words
27 May 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Video on demand as a way of delivering movies to Canadian homes has, over the years, been more of a talk show than an action flick for the country's cable firms.
Technology that lets television viewers pick -- at any time -- from a wide selection of digital movies and programs has been around for years. But until recently, bringing it to millions of
homes was a mammoth task that few were willing to take on.
The problem has been cost: The powerful, memory-rich computers needed to manage and distribute digital movies had a high price tag in the early 1990s, as did the task of
upgrading the cable networks for two-way delivery. Video-on-demand consumers also need a set-top box to play back the digital signals, but few of these boxes existed at the time -and those that did were far too expensive.
"Video on demand is the Holy Grail of TV services," says Israel Switzer, a Toronto-based technology consultant specializing in cable services. "The problem was the economics of
implementing it."
But the cost of the underlying technology is now falling, thanks in part to the market's thirst for interactive, multimedia content. The spirit of video on demand already exists on the
Internet , where millions of Star Wars fans, for example, can download five-minute trailers of The Phantom Menace, or where news junkies can view video clips at www .cnn.com
[http://www.cnn.com/].
In the business world, an increasing number of companies are using Internet technology to manage and store educational and training videos, which can then be digitally broadcast -on demand -- over an employee's personal computer.
The growing use of such applications is fuelling the construction of high-speed networks and the need for cheaper, faster computer chips.
Canada's leading cable companies have ordered hundreds of thousands of set-top boxes, which will be commercially rolled out this summer and will set the foundation for video-ondemand service. While challenges still remain, industry observers now expect the service to deliver full-length movies to Canadian homes as early as next year.
"You can call it the alignment of the planets," says Nick Hamilton-Piercy, vice-president and chief technology officer for Rogers CableSystems Ltd. in Toronto. "All the elements are
coming together to make this a feasible business."
He says hype got ahead of reality when talk of video on demand first hit the streets in the late 1980s and early 1990s. After a series of technical trials revealed the high cost of rolling
out home TV service, the industry threw the idea into budgetary hibernation. "It went the way of moth balls."
Bruce Campbell, president and chief executive officer of Mountain View, Calif.-based DemandVideo Corp., a video service provider, says there was disillusionment surrounding video
on demand after high-profile trials by companies such as Time Warner Inc. flopped in the face of anemic consumer demand and unwieldy costs.
"All of a sudden everything crashed, and video on demand almost became a dirty word for years and years," Mr. Campbell says.
By the mid-1990s, the hype had fizzled out and video stores, at risk of becoming obsolete by the technology, were once again safe from the digital terror.
Meanwhile, the Internet had grown synonymous with the term information highway. High-speed access to that highway quickly became a priority for the cable companies, who in
defending their turf from the telephone companies, realized that their home cable links could double as speedy Internet access ramps up to 100 times faster than a dial-up modem.
Those links only ran in one direction, however, so they had to be upgraded to compete against the telephone companies' interactive two-way networks. The telephone companies, in
turn, had to upgrade their two-way networks so they could reach the speeds of cable. The starter's pistol had sounded, and the race to overcome each industry's challenges was on.
Today, a snapshot of the Canadian cable industry shows that much work has be done. Hundreds of thousands of homes can now tap into interactive cable services, such as the
Internet service At Home. Calgary-based Shaw Communications Inc. says that in the next six months all of its 1.5 million cable customers will be able to get this service, which more
than 100,000 people now subscribe to.
The story is the same at Rogers CableSystems Ltd., Canada's largest cable company. Rogers and Shaw, two of At Home Corp.'s 21 partner cable companies, account for nearly half of
At Home's 460,000 Internet customers across North America.
The Yankee Group, a technology research firm based in Boston, says cable companies hold the key to video on demand. In its report, "Video On Demand: This Time It's For Real?" the
firm estimates the market to be worth as much as $1-billion (U.S.) by the end of next year.
With a good portion of the network upgrades complete and a solid base of At Home customers itching for new services, the outlook for video on demand is looking better every day.
"The cable infrastructure is now ready for interactive, two-way video-on-demand service," says Mr. Hamilton-Piercy, adding that the cost of the computers (or video servers) that are
used to store the movies has also dropped considerably. Such machines now cost about $100 for each " digital stream" -- less than a 10th of their cost in the early part of the decade -and the price continues to fall as the cost of memory chips drops.
A digital stream is a dedicated connection from a cable company's video server to a TV set-top box. If 300 people are each watching a different movie coming from the same video
server at the same time, they would each be taking up one digital stream.
The industry estimates that each stream can support 10 users, since not everyone will want to watch a movie at precisely the same time. The availability of cheaper video servers has
much to do with distance learning and corporate training video applications, which, during the "dark days" of video on demand, helped keep the companies that make these servers in
business, Mr. Campbell says.
That corporate demand has spawned an emerging market for digital asset management systems, which can store, manage, search and play back training and other short-length
video clips.
" Digital asset management is becoming a huge business," says Bruce Leichtman, director of the Yankee Group's media strategies group. And small companies are looking to get on
the ground floor of this market, such as Toronto-based Bulldog Group Inc.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

40/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The concept of a " digital library" that can efficiently store documents and video material is being increasingly viewed as a space-saver that also improves employee access to
information.
Nowhere is this more evident than in television news business, which is taking baby steps toward "digitizing" years of old broadcasts that will be stored in huge computer systems and
used for researching and editing stories.
Gordon Castle, vice-president of research and development at Atlanta-based CNN, says the global news organization has a five-year plan that will ultimately bring CNN news clips -past and present -- directly to the desktop.
CNN hired Sony Corp. and IBM to build a system that Mr. Castle says will store "100,000 hours of existing archives" and all future CNN content.
Part of the project exists. CNN bought a server system from Leitch Technology Corp. of Toronto that stores, for about a week, news clips that can be reused on air.
CNN isn't the only TV news organization doing this sort of limited video on demand. CTV and CITY-TV in Toronto, and TVA Network in Montreal, have digital systems in place that
offer short-term storage of video. The problem is expanding the systems to encompass a news organization's entire analog library.
Dany Harrison, vice-president of technology and multimedia at TVA, says all news organizations are looking to build digital libraries. "The big point is how far back are you going to
digitize your library?"
Once that question is answered, the next move is a labour issue.
Todd Griffith, director of information technology at CITY-TV, says his station has every intention of turning digital because videotapes take up too much room -- but it will take a couple
of years, working 24 hours a day, to convert its archives to digital format. A titanic task There's a strong belief that if a video-on-demand service is to ever deliver movies to the home,
it must be fed through the TV, not the personal computer.
"If you're thinking of renting Titanic, you're not going to do it over your PC," says the Yankee Group's Mr. Leichtman.
He says the cable companies, while moving in the right direction, are putting only their big toes in the water instead of diving right in.
"You have to deploy it over hundreds of thousands of homes to get any indication of if this is a viable service or not."
In Canada, at least, a plunge will soon be made. Digital set-top boxes are now in mass production in the United States. Rogers, Groupe Videotron Ltee and Cogeco Inc. have all
placed orders for Scientific-Atlanta Inc.'s Explorer 2000 product, while Shaw recently purchased 400,000 boxes from General Instrument Corp., adding to the 200,000 boxes it
purchased in 1996.
Mr. Hamilton-Piercy, from Rogers CableSystems, says finding a cheap set-top box was the missing link to making video on demand a TV-based service. He said after years of trials,
Rogers will sell digital boxes in Toronto and Montreal this summer. At first, the boxes will be used to deliver additional cable channels, CD-quality sound, surfing over the World Wide
Web , and on-screen program guides.
True video on demand -- including movies, travel programs, children's shows and other specialty content -- will be tested in these markets early next year. By that time, the price of
video servers will have fallen even more and, the cable firms hope, consumer demand for greater convenience and variety will have increased.
Still, the skeptics question how much consumers are willing to pay for that convenience.
Iain Grant, an analyst with the Yankee Group in Brockville, Ont., says the cable companies may have a difficult time competing with the option of walking to the video store and renting
Lawrence of Arabia for 99 cents. "You can't beat that."
It's a concern that telephone companies share.
Marvin Polis, director of interactive broadcast services for Edmonton-based Telus Multimedia, a unit of BCT.Telus Communications Inc., says growing demand for multimedia
applications has sparked interest in video on demand, but there's still a question of whether consumers will spend more on movies with such a service.
"At the end of the day, from a marketing perspective, if the average consumer just shrugs her head and doesn't buy more movies as a result of it, why would I want to add that to my
cost structure?"
Telephone companies can now provide high-speed Internet access to the home, but broadcasting over telephone lines is very complex -- perhaps, Mr. Polis says, requiring super-fast
fibre-optic pipes.
To gauge demand, the phone company has been involved in a two-year trial of "near video on demand" in Calgary and Edmonton.
Near video on demand doesn't give consumers an instant choice of movies. Instead, a digital set-top box is used to provide dozens, even hundreds, of different channels that play the
same movie over and over again. The idea is to organize these channels so customers can pick from a good selection of movies and start watching the choice within about 15 minutes.
Asked whether BCT.Telus will eventually take the plunge into true video on demand, Mr. Polis responds: "Ask me again in six months, I may have the answer."
Site seeing
www .ccta.com [http://www.ccta.com/] www .demandvideo.com [http://www.demandvideo.com/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv5r00rsd

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

41/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Papers advised to build identity in cyberspace to meet challenge --- Internet is a serious threat, newspapers told
Rob Ferguson
493 words
7 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

The Internet won't kill newspapers but it remains the biggest threat to their continued success, the chief executive of an online company told newspaper executives yesterday.
"There have been lots of scares in the past that in the end . . . didn't kill newspapers ," such as television and radio, said Charles Conn, chief executive of Ticketmaster Online Citysearch based in Pasadena, Calif.
Each time the newspaper industry adapted and still retains a tremendous advantage because newspapers are still more portable than laptop computers.
The newspaper industry also has market penetration and profits that online businesses "can only dream of," Conn added in a luncheon speech to several hundred executives and
editors at the Canadian Newspaper Association's annual meeting.
But that could change for the worse unless newspapers build a strong identity in cyberspace, added Conn, a 37-year-old graduate of the Harvard University business school.
While newspapers in Canada reach 75 per cent of adults, 30 per cent of adults have access to the Internet and the rate is growing rapidly.
"The Internet is an extraordinary opportunity for us," Kevin McCourt of the Newspaper Association of America told a seminar on the future of classified advertising.
Conn founded Citysearch in 1995, an online business that now has 30 newspaper partners, including The Toronto Star, Los Angeles Times and Washington Post, to build exclusive
city guides.
Citysearch merged its operations last year with Ticketmaster Online .
The Toronto Star's site, toronto.com, has the most traffic of any city guide site in Canada and offers Internet users up-to-date information on local businesses and services, including
maps and restaurant menus.
"All the large companies have made pretty big investments," noted Wayne Parrish, vice-president of strategic development for Sun Media Corp, which has a Web site called Canoe.
Newspapers positioned at the forefront of the Internet revolution are in the best positions to thrive, but competitive threats are moving ever closer, Conn warned.
"The top five news sites (on the Internet ) didn't include a single newspaper " last year in the United States.
The highest ranking newspaper was USA Today's Web site, which was ranked as the 10th most popular news site.
And newspapers are already losing some classified and display advertising to the companies on the Internet that specialize in those ads and sometimes offer free advertisements.
Conn also noted that investors, especially in the U.S., are eager to put money into Internet companies because stock prices have soared well beyond levels justified by profits, which
have often been slim.
Newspaper sites still have an advantage because of their editorial content and community information in addition to advertising, said Bruce Annan, vice-president of electronic media
at The Star.
"That will bring more people more often and make them stay," he said in an interview yesterday.
Document tor0000020010830dv5700dy0

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

42/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Commentary

Internet Envy It's a wide world of anecdotes: 'Oh yeah, they offered me the top job at Somedamnedsite.com -- begged me to
take it -- but I turned it down.'
MICHAEL KINSLEY
1360 words
14 June 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A13
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Redmond, Wash. -- The fact that the Internet will make life better for all humankind has long been noted, even on the East Coast.
What seems to have struck the East Coast only recently is that the Internet is making a smaller subset of all humankind -- people who start Internet -related companies or join them
before they go public -- incredibly wealthy. The New York Times reported as much on its front page recently, so you know it's probably true.
Out here in cyberland, people have been aware of this fact for several years. Indeed we have talked of little else since about September, 1996, which is the last time anyone mentioned
a book except in the context of Amazon.com. The basic anecdote -- variations on "When I knew him in college he was stoned all the time . . . two years ago he was living in a
corrugated box on his ex-wife's compost pile (we all actually pitched in to buy him a new futon!) . . . then last week they had their IPO [initial public offering], and now he's worth $350million" -- declined long ago from fresh conversational gambit through staple to cliche.
So what's new? Money has always been a fraught topic. A New York writer who regularly mines his sex life and longings for material begged off an invitation to write about the Internet
IPO phenomenon for Slate on the grounds that his feelings about money are too personal and complex. And envy didn't just become a deadly sin when its existence was
acknowledged by The New York Times. Nevertheless, the arrival of Internet Envy on the Washington-New York buzz axis is new in several ways.
One element, obviously, is the size of these Internet fortunes. Hundreds of millions. As syndicated columnist Matt Miller recently pointed out, with numbers like this surging across the
Times business section, even investment bankers "feel like wage slaves at $10-million a year." (And, poor souls, these investment bankers generally cannot find comfort in an
independent value system.)
Second, there's the speed. It's one thing to console yourself that at least you didn't have to spend 30 years doing a job you would hate. That trick is a bit harder when you read that
someone (inevitably, someone with the same name as that bozo down the hall sophomore year . . . but it can't be . . . look, here's his picture . . . oh, hell) joined some nothing of a
company, sat there through the IPO, and cashed out, all in a couple of years. How awful can a job be?
Answer: maybe not so awful at all. In fact, maybe it's remarkably similar to the job you're doing now. A third startling difference about Internet IPO wealth is that some of it is raining
down on journalists ! Writing journalists , no less, at places like Amazon and TheStreet and iVillage ( dot-com , dot-com , dot-com ). This is something truly new in the history of the
known universe. Slate's former Keeping Tabs columnist Emily Yoffe observes, "You no longer can say, 'Sure, I could have made a lot of money if I'd decided to be a Wall Street money
grubber.' And it's not just 'a famous TV hack' spending every weekend speaking to the Aluminum Manufacturers for $50,000. We're talking about journalists getting seriously rich just
by being journalists ."
Thus journalists have joined software engineers and business executives in peddling the other basic Internet Envy anecdote: variations on, "Oh yeah, they offered me the top job at
Somedamnedsite.com -- begged me to take it, offered me 75 per cent of the equity plus options for another 75 -- but I turned it down." Even during the first few years of Internet
frenzy, Internet Envy was not widespread in the N.Y.-D.C. buzzworld because the whole thing seemed to be happening on another planet -- to people one not only didn't know but
could scarcely imagine. Only very recently have lottery winners started popping up in one's own neighbourhood.
Internet Envy exists in cyberland itself, too, but it is much more straightforward. Everybody is trying to do the same thing; some succeed, and those who don't are envious. You don't
have to pretend that you're not. Also, unlike back East, there's no vertiginous obsession with how young these IPO-heads are, because almost everybody is scandalously young.
The rules have indeed changed . But they're always changing, in a couple of ways. Some changes in personal values are simply part of growing older. Then there are shifts in the
values of the general culture.
To oversimplify: In high school the jocks are on top (unless, of course, armed losers storm the cafeteria one day and mow them down). But the smart kids tend to win in adult life. The
glow of that happy discovery can last for years. These are folks lucky enough to be able to choose their careers and to have a good shot at success at whatever they choose.
At the crucial moment when they make their choices, many of these people honestly believe that money -- beyond the cost of upper-middle-class comfort -- is not all that important to
them, and most of them may turn out to be right. But some are responding to the fleeting hormonal surges of youthful idealism, or to the special status hierarchy of the academic
subculture where they temporarily reside. In the most tragic examples, a charismatic professor will entice them into a lifetime of French medieval history, about which their curiosity is
exhausted before they get their PhDs. In less extreme cases, they become writers. Then they discover, in their 30s or 40s, that money is important to them after all. This is the moment
when reading about some 28-year-old who's suddenly worth $300-million can have an effect that requires medical attention.
Sometimes this personal process of maturity or decay (take your pick) is reinforced by what's happening in the culture. Money is never unimportant, but there are moments when it is
more important than others. This is one of them. Actually, a graph of the changing value of money in the status market would look a lot like a graph of the Dow Jones industrial average:
It rose steadily starting in about 1982 -- the year a star New York Times reporter shocked his journalist colleagues by quitting the Times to become an investment banker -- crested
and sank briefly in the late 1980s, quickly recovered, and has been hitting new heights ever since. In these days, when even the most softhearted and public-spirited people become
venture capitalists, younger readers may find it hard to believe there was ever a time when even an extremely ambitious person, motivated entirely by a desire to do well -- rather than
to do good, or to do anything in particular -- might well decide to be a journalist . But it's true.
Of course, it's possible that the stock market and the status market have peaked together again. Price-earnings ratios are perilously high in both. A $400-million fortune gets you about
as much status as a mere $50-million got you a decade ago. Speculators in status futures are rumoured to be pulling out of money and getting into undervalued properties including
kindness, musical talent and short-term memory. The decline of money is also expected to benefit blue chips such as physical beauty, according to some analysts.
So maybe this is the wrong moment to cash in your reputation as a saint -- based on 21/2 decades spent bathing patients in a South American leprosy clinic -- for a job (with 50-percent equity stake) as CEO of Leper.com (soon to be LPRC on the NASDAQ). In this market as in others, timing is everything.
Michael Kinsley is editor of the online magazine Slate, from which this is reprinted.
Document glob000020010827dv6e00v65

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

43/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Squeeze play --- In the digital age, virtually everything we see and hear uses one form of data compression or another. Here's
a primer.
Gerry Blackwell
3204 words
12 August 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Thanks in part to the Internet , everything today is going digital - TV, radio, cameras, home video, even telephones. And that means the squeeze is on - the data squeeze, that is.
Data compression, an arcane science that involves translating data into a kind of digital shorthand so it takes up less storage space and less transmission capacity, is the secret
ingredient that makes virtually all digital technologies work - starting with one of the oldest, fax.
Compressed data is like frozen orange juice. You extract water to more efficiently store and transport it, then reconstitute it at the other end by thawing and adding water.
Without video compression, it would take 40 or more DVD discs to hold one movie. And it would take hours to download those brief, grainy video clips from the Internet .
Without image compression, my hard disk would be clogged to overflowing in no time with all the digital snapshots I take. And e-mailing pics to friends and family would bring
networks to their knees.
New streaming video and audio applications on the Web using products such as Real Networks's RealPlayer and Microsoft's Media Player rely absolutely on compression technology.
Chances are you've already had first-hand experience with data compression - even if you've only downloaded something from the Web or backed up your files.
Knowing how it works - and sometimes doesn't work - will help you understand what you see and hear, and might also help you make better decisions about which tools to use.
First, why do we need compression at all?
WHY COMPRESS? Digital technologies store all kinds of information - pictures, sound, motion video, animation, as well as numbers and text - in a code of binary digits or bits: ones
and zeroes.
To accurately represent information in this way often requires a lot of bits - a lot, that is, relative to the amount of storage space or transmission capacity you have at your disposal.
Consider a digital technology that doesn't use compression, or doesn't use much, such as audio on CDs.
CD audio recorders take samples - digital snapshots - of sound 44,000 times per second. For each sample, they store 16 data bits per stereo channel, 32 bits in all.
You can do the arithmetic to figure out how much storage this requires. Eight bits equals a byte. A 650-megabyte CD holds about 74 minutes of stereo music.
But given that LPs held only 30 minutes per side and consumers accepted that, storing digital audio on CDs without compression made sense.
It was also easy to provide a fast enough transmission link between the CD reader and the DAC ( digital -analogue converter), the device that translates a digital audio stream back
into analogue format for playback through your stereo system.
For CD audio to work, you have to move the data at 1.4 megabits (44,000 times 32 bits) per second. CD players can do that, no problem.
But think about what would happen if you wanted to transmit that music over distance via a telecommunications link.
Without compression, it would take over a megabyte to store a single frame of TV video.
The digital network links most consumers are familiar with are their Internet connections. If it's a modem connection, the highest bit rate is only 56K - that is 56 kilobits per second
(kbps) or 56,000 bits per second (bps).
Sending CD audio over that link simply wouldn't work - 1,400,000 doesn't go into 56,000. The playing device at the receiving end couldn't get the data fast enough to play it.
But if you could reduce the amount of data required to represent that audio stream, then you wouldn't need as much capacity to transmit it . . .
Or think what would happen if you wanted to store video on that same 650MB CD.
Video is just a sequence of still images. When you show the images one after another in order at a fixed rate, the human eye is tricked into seeing motion.
Digital systems record still images as bitmaps, grids of dots. Each dot or pixel - picture element - represents a tiny part of the scene. The system digitally records colour value and
brightness for each.
Without compression, it would take over a megabyte to store one standard television video frame. Now multiply that by 30 frames per second, the frame rate required for motion video,
and then by the 120 minutes of a typical movie.
We're up to something like 216,000 megabytes - 216 gigabytes - or enough data to fill some 360 CDs.
The improved storage capacity of DVD - about 4.5 gigabytes currently, with an upper limit in future of 17 gigabytes - doesn't begin to solve the problem either. You're still looking at
about 45 DVDs.
Now think about the challenges involved in sending digital video over the Internet to surfers with 56K modems . . .
So that's why we need compression in the world of digital media. And it's also important in the less data-intensive world of text, spreadsheet and database files on your PC.
Now how does data compression actually work?
HOW IT WORKS: Different compression systems use different techniques. But what they all do is jettison redundant or unnecessary data.
And although not all compression systems involve entirely automated processes - some require humans to make decisions - all use mathematical formulae, called algorithms, to
calculate which data they can safely throw away.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

44/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

There are two basic types of compression systems: lossless and lossy.
Lossless systems, such as the systems used for backing up or archiving files on a hard disk, allow you to reconstitute or uncompress files exactly as they were before compression - bit
for bit.
With lossy systems - used extensively in compressing multimedia data and in telecommunications - some data is lost. In the most successful lossy compression situations - DVD
movies, for example - you don't notice the loss.
But inherent in the idea of lossy compression is that you may sacrifice the quality or accuracy of the sound, image or video in order to reduce the volume of data to manageable levels.
Anybody who has tried viewing streaming video over the Internet knows about the kind of sacrifices we're talking about here.
Compression systems typically use multiple techniques. Most of these are beyond the ken of mere mortals such as we. But it helps to at least have some flavour for how these things
work.
One type of compression algorithm used in lossless compression systems, for example, looks for repeated data sequences in a file - such as sequences of text characters.
It replaces subsequent occurrences of a sequence with a pointer to the first instance or with an index number that refers to a dictionary it creates of such sequences.
The pointer or index number requires less data than the original sequence, so the total amount of data is reduced. This is, of course, a gross simplification.
LOSSLESS COMPRESSION: Using these and other techniques, lossless archiving systems such as PKZip from PKWare Inc. ( www .pkware.com [http://www.pkware.com/]), WinZip
from Nico Mak Computing Inc. ( www .winzip.com [http://www.winzip.com/]) and StuffIt from Aladdin Systems Inc. ( www .aladdinsys.com [http://www.aladdinsys.com/]) let you
compress files on your hard disk - and decompress them later, with no alteration of their content.
Some lossless archiving systems can compress data by up to 10 times. In compression lingo, this is expressed as a ratio - eg. 10:1. The amount of compression possible depends on
the type of material being compressed.
When you create a compressed file, such as a Zip file, it usually has an extension, such as .zip, that identifies it as a file compressed using that system.
Another feature of these systems is that you can compress a number of files together in one archive file.
Many files you'll download from the Web use one of these compression systems to reduce the amount of data that must be sent - and thus the time it takes for you to receive it.
But as long as you have a copy of WinZip on your computer you can always uncompress Zip files once you've downloaded them.
LOSSY COMPRESSION: While image compression systems may use some of the same mathematical techniques as lossless compression systems, they almost always use others as
well that destroy data.
JPEG, a compression system for colour photographs and fine art, is probably the most successful of this kind.
JPEG, pronounced jay-peg, is a standardized system developed by the Joint Photographic Experts Group, a committee of the International Standards Organization (ISO).
Most graphics and photo editing programs and Web browsers have JPEG compression-decompression capabilities built in.
One of the key features of JPEG is that you can vary the amount of compression.
When you save a file in the .jpg format, select Options in the Save dialogue and you'll be able to set the percentage of compression used on that file.
The more you compress, the more data you jettison - and the more you sacrifice image quality.
How does JPEG decide which data to discard? Like other compression schemes, it uses multiple techniques. But many of them rely on observed characteristics of human visual acuity
- what we can see and, more importantly, what we don't notice.
For example, most of us can distinguish differences in bright and dark areas in an image better than we can colour gradations. So one of the things JPEG discards first is information
about very subtle colour differences.
The information dropped by JPEG compression is barely, if at all, noticeable to the human eye using a computer monitor.
Using its grab-bag of compression tricks, JPEG can take an image file stored in an uncompressed format such as Windows Bitmap (.bmp), and output a file as small as 5 per cent of
the original size.
At that level of compression you'll notice a fairly severe loss of image quality. Digital artifacts - often blockiness and colour shifts - will appear, as well as a loss of edge definition.
But if you select a more moderate JPEG compression ratio, it's possible to reduce the file size from a few megabytes to a few hundred kilobytes with very little if any noticeable loss in
image quality.
Although other formats such as GIF and PNG have some advantages, JPEG has become the dominant format for images on the Internet . The information dropped by JPEG
compression is barely, if at all, noticeable to the human eye using a computer monitor.
Alternatively, graphics professionals producing images for high-resolution print publishing - magazines, brochures or advertising material, for instance - are much less likely to use
compression in their finished documents.
VIDEO COMPRESSION: Video is the most data-intensive media type, so it requires the most aggressive compression to make it fit on portable media such as CDs and DVDs, or on
home PC hard drives - or to transmit it over broadcast or cable channels, or the Web.
There are two types of video compression: intra-frame and inter-frame. Intra-frame uses much the same bag of tricks as image compression schemes such as JPEG, only applies them
to each frame in the video.
Inter-frame, as we'll see, introduces some additional techniques unique to video.
Both start by manipulating a quartet of basic factors that together define the viewing experience: frame rate, colour resolution, spatial resolution and image quality.
The frame rate for "full-motion" video - what you see on TV or produce with a camcorder - is 30 frames per second. One way to reduce the volume of data required to represent video is
to reduce the number of frames you store and transmit.
This results in motion that may appear less than smooth, but for some applications is acceptable.
Streaming video and video conferencing systems on the Web, for example, sometimes reduce the frame rate to a few per second, resulting in very jerky motion.
Any colour image, including the individual frames in video, is created from a pallette of colours. The more colours in the pallette, the more data bits are needed to represent each colour.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

45/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

So another way to reduce the volume of data required to describe video is to reduce the size of the colour pallette.
In the RGB (red-green-blue) colour system used in computers, if you want full or true colour (a pallette of 16.7 million colours), it takes 24 data bits to describe each pixel. You can
reduce that to 16 if you're using a pallette of 65,535 colours - and still get realistic results - or even to 8 bits (256 colours).
Spatial resolution refers to the size of the video image on your screen.
In the context of digital video on your computer - that you capture to edit using new non-linear video editing tools, or post on a Web page - this is determined first by the pixel
resolution of the video display system itself.
On a system set to a resolution of 640x480, for example, a 640x480 video image will fill the screen. On a system set to 800x600 that same video image will appear in a window that
takes up only part of the screen.
You can reduce the amount of data simply by reducing the size (in pixels) of the image. You'll notice that video on CD-ROMs and over the Web is generally displayed in a very small
window. Now you know why.
The last of the four factors, image quality, is mostly the domain of JPEG-style image compression. But inter-frame techniques - the point at which compression turns from science to
black art - also play a part.
Inter-frame compression schemes look at each frame in a video sequence and try to determine which information might be dispensable.
Consider a TV talking head, for example. Because the background in the scene is not moving, it doesn't change from frame to frame. The person's torso may not move either.
So inter-frame video compression systems retain one frame at the beginning of a sequence with information about the whole image.
Then in subsequent frames they only retain information about the parts of the image that have changed from the previous frame - sometimes just the lips moving. Everything else is
discarded.
The most famous inter-frame video compression systems are those developed by another ISO subcommittee, the Motion Picture Experts Group or MPEG (pronounced em-peg).
The MPEG standards define specifications for a compressed video stream. Individual developers have interpreted these standards in developing their own video codecs (codersdecoders), which do the compression and decompression.
Your PC probably has several video codecs in it, including, possibly, an MPEG codec. Streaming video systems such as RealNetworks' RealMedia and Apple's QuickTime also have
their own codecs.
The first MPEG standard, now referred to as MPEG-1 was developed to define video that could be stored on a CD-ROM and played back on PCs and Macs using the original CD-ROM
drive technology, which transferred data from drive to processor at 1.4 megabits per second.
VideoCD, a format that fizzled in North America but is still widely used in Asia, was an adaptation of MPEG-1 for storing movies on CD.
VideoCDs take two CDs to store a complete movie and tend to look fuzzy or blocky on larger television screens. But on the whole, results are acceptable.
MPEG-2 specifies a much higher-quality compressed video stream and uses more sophisticated compression techniques.
MPEG-2 is used in DVD movies to store "better-than-broadcast-quality" full-length movies in 4.7 gigabytes. It's also used in digital satellite TV transmissions.
Now the MPEG committee is working on a new standard - MPEG-4 - that promises to improve the quality of multimedia on the Web.
AUDIO COMPRESSION: Of course, most video also includes audio. And audio compression is also essential to streaming audio on the Web, such as Web radio - and to digital phone
systems, including digital cellular systems, PBXs and new IP ( Internet protocol) phone systems.
Like video systems, audio compression systems use a variety of arcane techniques, some lossless, some lossy.
And also like video compression systems, they manipulate a suite of parameters - including number of audio channels, sampling rate and bit resolution.
The audio track in a video doesn't have to be created or stored using a CD-quality 44,000-times-per-second sampling rate, for example. Reducing the sampling rate reduces the
amount of data to be stored and transmitted.
Similarly, if you store stereo sound as mono, you'll halve the data storage and transmission capacity requirements.
That said, one of the astonishing achievements of MPEG-2 is that through very clever compression techniques it makes it possible to store cinema-quality AC-3 (5.1 discreet digital
channels) surround sound along with the video on DVDs.
This brings us to MP3, the compressed audio format that is causing shockwaves in the audio recording industry. MP3 refers to MPEG-1 audio layer 3, a compression algorithm that
was created by the MPEG people to reduce the size of audio files for digital media.
It was relatively obscure format that didn't generate much attention until the Internet came along and it was clear CD-quality audio was much too large to be moved around
conveniently. Prescient Internet start-ups such as Nullsoft foresaw that MP3 could fill the need for a more portable audio format and began working with the open source code. Soon
Nullsoft released an MP3 player called Winamp, and others released encoder/rippers so people could create their own MP3 files.
A revolution was born, as millions of MP3s began whizzing their way around the Internet . The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) was slow to react to the
phenomenon, but when it realized the format's potential to erode profits, it changed course instantly.
One of the early kicks against MP3 was that it sounded inferior to CD audio. But the MP3 developers have improved the algorithm dramatically recently, and the MP3 phenomenon
appears to be virtually unstoppable.
BOTTOM LINE: If despite everything you've read so far, you're still thinking, "Yeah, but how does it actually do this?" don't feel bad.
The fact is, unless you have a PhD in mathematics and a pretty intimate knowledge of computer science, you wouldn't understand the detailed account of how compression algorithms
work anyway.
And I couldn't provide it. Sometimes you just can't understand everything.
But even if you can't understand how compression works, you can sure see that it does work.
If you don't already own one, rent a DVD player tonight and watch a DVD movie. It will be the best video you've ever seen at home - and this is a system that uses a lossy compression
scheme.
Go figure.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

46/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

--Freelance writer Gerry Blackwell covers the world of multimedia and CD-ROMs. E-mail him at gerryblackwell@home.com.
Document tor0000020010830dv8c00sn5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

47/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BOOKS ON LINE
The Arts

The mother of all libraries The Internet has quietly become a vast, free storehouse of classic texts and rare-book facsimiles, a
veritable modern-day Library of Alexandria.
GERALD LEVITCH
2304 words
15 May 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C17
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Forget about porn on the Internet -- at least for a while. Stop reading your E-mail. Don't worry about electronic commerce; you can do your Internet shopping later. It's time to read a
book.
And not just any book. Serious literature has staked a highbrow claim to cyberspace. Thanks largely to the not-for-profit efforts of universities, cultural agencies and bibliophiles around
the world, much of the world's great reading is quietly being transcribed and posted on the Net, including facsimiles of original manuscripts and rare books. In just the past few years,
millions of complete texts have been posted, with countless more appearing each week. And access is generally free, whether you read the books on screen or print off a paper copy.
For the price of a computer and an Internet link, it's possible to pull up a chair, settle down with a cup of tea and a warm monitor screen and read the collected works of Jane Austen
and Charles Dickens. Or maybe the collected poems of W. B. Yeats or a Sherlock Holmes tale by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Too commonplace? Connoisseurs are welcome to read the complete novels of George Gissing, a late 19th-century, early 20th-century British realist. Or how about some occult mumbo
jumbo from The Equinox, an extremely rare, short-lived magazine edited and mostly written by the notorious English black-magic practitioner and bad poet Aleister Crowley? Or maybe
a better, if equally obscure, poet, such as the fin de siecle decadent Ernest Dowson?
"Most people don't know that if they want books, they should go to the Internet ," said David Ticoll, managing director and chief executive officer of the Alliance for Converging
Technologies, a Toronto-based management consulting firm. "One of the paradoxes of the Internet is that, while there are studies to indicate that there has been a long-term decline of
reading in our society, the Internet itself is a great medium for distributing content in the form of the printed word. And it's especially ideal for distributing obscure works."
Ticoll said he recently heard the Vatican will be putting part of its collection of Medieval illuminated prayer books and other religious texts on the Net.
No tastes are too specialized for the Internet library, it seems. Are you a theatre buff? You can read the scripts of Shakespeare, edited for length and linguistic clarity by Orson Welles
for the Mercury Theatre productions of the 1930s and deposited with the Library of Congress. Fond of the great poet and artist William Blake? A growing file of facsimile editions of all
the versions of Blake's illuminated books, whose extant copies can usually be counted on the fingers of one hand, can now be readily accessed on the Net.
Lovers of rare printed books take heart. The Net may not be able to replace the tactile qualities of bound volumes. There's no electronic substitute for the unique feel of handmade
paper, vellum spines, heavy buckram, old leather bindings and morocco slipcases. But if you can't afford what's become an increasingly expensive hobby, and if you don't have access
to the rare-book room of an important university library, then the Internet may have a special place for you. It is fast becoming the biggest classics library in the world, a modern-day
Library of Alexandria, where all the printed knowledge in the world, and all the best that has been thought and said, can be accessed with a click of a mouse. And, unlike the original
Library of Alexandria, it's non-flammable.
Books have existed on computer networks since at least 1971, when Project Gutenberg ( www .promo.net/pg/ [http://www.promo.net/pg/]) was initiated at the University of Illinois to
make copies of classic books more freely available. Project Gutenberg's titles were selected on the basis of universal appeal and, like most of today's free Internet book sites, on what
is available in the public domain -- that is, works no longer protected by copyright.
Free content and the trivial cost of posting text on a Web site means almost anyone can afford to become a publisher of great works. Among the more than 50 books postedby the
Eldritch Press, run by Eric Eldred of New Hampshire, are works by Nathaniel Hawthorne, Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. and Henry James. Eldred's titles, which reflect his personal tastes,
also include some obscure First World War novels and publications about small boats, all of which are relatively rare and out of print .
It's this kind of enthusiast's spirit that guides the publishing impulses of some other E-text site operators, such as Antony Freeman of Data Text Publishing in England. Freeman's
company specializes in electronic publishing and Internet services for corporate clients. Its E-text site, Bibliomania, was started for fun in 1995 with a list of 20 books.
"We had the original 18 titles on tape and nothing particular to do with them, so we created the Web site, part of learning how to make a Web site as much as anything else," Freeman
said.
Although most academic sites are not-for-profit, Freeman carries advertising on his site. "Initially, the advertising income was paltry. However, it's increased substantially in the last year
and dramatically in the last six months. It's now quite definitely a commercial venture."
He chose titles that are mostly standard classics, such as Little Women by Louisa May Alcott and Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte, but also includes such uncommon choices as a
sporting novel, Mr. Sponge's Sporting Tour, by the 19th-century English author Robert Surtees, and Moonfleet by 19th-century English novelist John Meade Falkner.
Bibliomania now includes 60 classic novels, reference books, poetry and assorted non-fiction titles, from Karl von Clausewitz's On War to Sigmund Freud's The Interpretation of
Dreams. You can read James Joyce's Ulysses and Gaston Leroux's novel Phantom of the Opera, including a neat illustration from a 1920s edition of the book.
The biggest challenge facing the Internet reader remains figuring out what's available and where to find it.
Project Gutenberg and Bibliomania are just two of innumerable E-text sites, ranging from personal labours of love to mammoth university efforts designed to make rare or uncommon
texts available to students, scholars or simply lay readers with a taste for the academic or unusual.
And any would-be librarian would be daunted by the organizational task of keeping up with what's going on in cyberspace hour by hour. For example, the Library of Congress is
creating a new digital archive that will eventually bring what ZD Network News , an Internet service of technology-media company Ziff-Davis, described as millions of texts,
photographs, maps and video treasures to cyberspace. The National Digital Library is a five-year project to reproduce the LOC's mammoth American history collection on the
Internet . More than 1.5 million items, dating from the 16th century to present, are already on line. You can find George Washington's diaries and reproductions of Walt Whitman's
notebooks, as well as the Orson Welles Mercury Theatre editions of Shakespeare.
Unlike Project Gutenberg and Bibliomania, the Library of Congress project is emphasizing rarer items and materials unique to its collection, which can now be made available to
readers everywhere.
It also raises an interesting challenge for local educators, who, for example, normally would pick their own history texts but may find themselves in the future competing against a
global on-line text collection that, while lacking in certain local content, will be available to every student with access to a computer. Now professors can assemble on-line reading lists.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

48/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

That is the intention of ENNC986 Class Project: The Germ: A Hypermedia Critical Edition. English-lit students at the University of Virginia are evidently studying the central documents
of the pre-Raphaelite aesthetic movement in the mid-19th century. The Germ was a short-lived literary magazine edited by Dante Gabriel Rossetti and filled with the works of his
artist/poet chums, such as Holman Hunt. But you can read along.
Does all this mean that traditional print -and-paper technology is doomed? The short answer, according to Ticoll, is yes.
"Admittedly, whatever's available in electronic-book technology at present is pretty clunky," he conceded. "But it's likely to get better a lot faster than anyone expects. By the time
anyone who's in primary school today reaches their 20s, electronic books will be common currency. As bad as it is today, you should realize that today is the worst it will ever be. By
2010, people will be carrying electronic books on the subway, reading electronic books in the bathroom, and taking them to bed."
A selected bibliography of cyberspace classics
Yahoo! Digital Libraries page
(dir.yahoo.com/Reference/Libraries/ Digital --Libraries/) Large index compiled by the Internet portal Yahoo!
Online Books and Internet Libraries ( www .inform.umd.edu/EdRes/ReadingRoom/ Internet --Books/ [http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/ReadingRoom/Internet--Books/])
Created by the University of Maryland.
On-Line Books Page
( www .cs.cmu.edu/books.html [http://www.cs.cmu.edu/books.html]) Lists more than 8,000 books, plus E-text book news and links to other sites.
Project Bartleby Archive
( www .cc.columbia.edu/acis/bartleby/ [http://www.cc.columbia.edu/acis/bartleby/]) Named after Melville's short story Bartleby, the Scrivener, which, of course, is included in the
collection. Also contains such interesting selections as Robert Graves's Fairies and Fuseliers, Sarah Orne Jewett's The Country of the Pointed Firs and John Buchan's The Thirty-Nine
Steps.
The National Digital Library
(memory.loc.gov/ammem/mdbquery.html) A five-year project to reproduce the Library of Congress's mammoth American history collection on the Internet . More than 1.5 million items,
dating from the 16th century to present, are already on line, including George Washington's diaries and reproductions of Walt Whitman's notebooks.
The Germ
(jefferson.village.virginia.edu/courses/ennc986/germ.html A short-lived literary magazine edited by Dante Gabriel Rossetti and filled with the works of his artist/poet chums, such as
Holman Hunt.
Humanities Text Initiative ( www .hti.umich.edu/ [http://www.hti.umich.edu.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/]) Scholarly titles courtesy of the University of Michigan.
The Alex Catalogue of Electronic Texts
(sunsite.berkeley.edu/alex/about.html) Assorted titles, with advanced search capabilities that let you zero in on specific words or themes in the text.
The English Server (eserver.org/) Operated by Carnegie Mellon University. Publishes more than 20,000 texts in a range of humanities topics, including essays, fiction, journals, theory,
drama and poetry, including that fine old 18th-century classic Fanny Hill.
Literature in Translation (etext.virginia.edu/subjects/translation.html)
If you've been waiting for a good, rainy evening to snuggle up with some of the works of St. Thomas Aquinas, wait no longer. This site has his collected works, including the Summa
Theologica, as well as such European-lit novelties as Maxim Gorky's The Billionaire.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Classics (classics.mit.edu/Browse/authors.html)
Latin and Greek classics in translation.
Perseus Project at Tufts University ( www .perseus.tufts.edu [http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/]) More classics, from Aeschines and Aeschylus to Thucydides and Xenophon
Internet Medieval Sourcebook
( www .fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html [http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html])
University of Virginia Modern English Collection (etext.lib.virginia.edu/modeng/modeng0.browse.html)
Includes a facsimile of Tennyson's original manuscript of The Charge of the Light Brigade.
Gaslight
( www .mtroyal.ab.ca/programs/arts/english/gaslight/ [http://www.mtroyal.ab.ca/programs/arts/english/gaslight/]) Organized by Mount Royal College in Calgary, featuring a few familiar
but mostly obscure mystery and horror short stories and novels written between 1800 and 1919. Includes a number of truly rare Canadiana entries, such as The Dominion in 1983,
written in 1883 by the curiously named Ralph Centennius.
Australian Literature Database at the University of Sydney
(setis.library.usyd.edu.au/ozlit/browse.html) For those who like their literature antipodal.
Theodore Roosevelt Selected Works
( www .bartleby.com/tr/ [http://www.bartleby.com/tr/]) Hard-to-find books by Theodore Roosevelt, including The Rough Riders; Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail; The Strenuous Life; and
History as Literature. Written proof that they don't make presidents like they used to.
The Equinox
(leapinglaughter.org/equinox or www .itlink.se/oto/equinox/eqi05001.html [http://www.itlink.se/oto/equinox/eqi05001.html])
Bizarre stuff from occultist Aleister Crowley.
William Blake Archive

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

49/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

(jefferson.village.virginia.edu/blake/main.html) A tribute to the best mystic/artist of them all, sponsored by the Library of Congress. You can view Blake's various illuminated books, in
variant editions, in full-colour facsimile.
W. B. Yeats
( www .inform.umd.edu/EdRes/ReadingRoom/Poetry/Yeats/ [http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/ReadingRoom/Poetry/Yeats/])
Renaissance Electronic Texts (utl2.library.utoronto.ca/utel/ret/ret.html) Series of old-spelling editions of early individual copies of English Renaissance books and manuscripts, compiled
by the University of Toronto.
Antique Books Inc. ( www .antiquebooks.net/library.html [http://www.antiquebooks.net/library.html]) Includes gloriously mildewed reproductions, such as an 1835 edition of The Life of
Benjamin Franklin. Ditto for an 1816 edition of An Introduction to the Natural History and Classification of Insects, and Pioneer Preacher, published in 1856.
Internet Library of Early Journals
( www .bodley.ox.ac.uk/ilej/start.htm [http://www.bodley.ox.ac.uk/ilej/start.htm]) A digital library of 18th- and 19th-century journals. Imagine yourself in a the library of a fusty private club
in London, browsing at random through the January, 1734, edition of Gentleman's Magazine, reading a sizzling debate on the true authorship of The Aeneid (and, no, according to the
article, Virgil didn't have the time), or reading negative contemporary book reviews of Keats in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv5f00pgp

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

50/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FUTURETECH
Report on Business Magazine

THE NEXT RELIC CINRAM BECAME A SUCCESS MAKING PRERECORDED CDS AND TAPES. WILL THE INTERNET MAKE
THOSE HARD MEDIA OBSOLETE?
PAUL WEINBERG
2203 words
29 October 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
186
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

"So you're doomed!" The young woman's remark to the executives of Cinram International Ltd. appeared to echo the general opinion of investors assembled in the Vancouver meeting
room last spring. The woman went on to describe how a friend of hers had learned to download music from the Web onto a PC for free. Using an inexpensive compact-disc writing
machine, the woman added, her friend could have shared the music with many others.
It was not the sort of observation that Lewis Ritchie, Cinram's executive vice-president, wanted to hear. The Vancouver group was one of many that Cinram invited to meetings in
different cities during a cross-country road show prior to its annual general meeting in Toronto last June. The Toronto-based manufacturer of hard media--compact discs (CDs), digital
versatile discs (DVDs) and videocassettes for the music, software and movie industries--had hoped to defuse nascent investor sentiment that perhaps technology in general and the
Internet in particular were threatening its core business.
Ritchie maintains that the meeting strategy was, for the most part, successful. He recalls the sessions with investors, most of them professional money managers, as being generally
amiable. "I would say that our large institutional shareholders needed initially a better understanding [of the impact of Internet technology]," Ritchie says. "But they seem to be
comfortable right now. It is a wait-and-see attitude."
Still, the woman's doomsaying reflects the view of many investors. Despite strong sales ($642.7 million in 1998), Cinram's stock price had drifted down to around $12 early last fall from
a high of about $26.85 in 1998. So somebody's selling it. And while some analysts echo company executives' claims that Cinram is sound, it's having trouble shaking the image of a
company that could well end up in the scrapheap that includes manufacturers of spats, buggy whips and vinyl record albums.
Cinram isn't accustomed to being labelled vulnerable. The company was founded in Montreal in 1969 by Isidore Philosophe, a native of Lebanon, who spotted a coming market for tape
cassettes and eight-track cartridges even while vinyl records were still the primary medium of the music industry. At the outset, Cinram--the name is a loose acronym for cinema, radio
and music--focused on Canadian-based music labels, but it soon branched out internationally. Since going public in 1986, it has grown into one of the world's largest manufacturers of
multimedia products for the music, software and
film industries, with production facilities in Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, Mexico France, Spain and the Netherlands.
Cinram's strengths have been its ability to adapt to new technology, to diversify and to extend customer service. It graduated from putting customers' recorded material on eight-track
cartridges, to doing so on tape cassettes and CDs. Manufacturing prerecorded movie videocassettes remains a strong business; but Cinram now also puts both music and movies on
DVDs, the latest generation of hard media. Music CDs and software CD-ROMs together account for about 50% of its business; the other 50% involves the duplication of videocassettes
of movies for rental and sale.
Service has been another Cinram forte. In addition to quality manufacturing, it has given customers just-in-time delivery, so record and software companies need not maintain huge
inventories. Cinram also enables customers to cope with hits that create unexpected demand. And by delivering directly to wholesalers and retailers, the company can effectively take
on its customers' distribution role.
Nimbleness and attention to customers, of course, are hallmarks of any good manufacturer. And nobody denies that Cinram has been that. But it's taken mainly a manufacturer's
approach to problem-solving--investing in newer, better equipment, for example. Change has meant manufacturing hard media in a new package--switching from cassettes, say, to
CDs. The problem now, though, is the Internet , a distinctly non-manufacturing phenomenon.
Philosophe, who is still chairman, president and CEO of the company, noted in the 1998 annual report that it was "keeping a close eye on electronic delivery." He concluded that
Cinram was not yet concerned that music and video via the Internet was a viable option to hard media.
Indeed, until recently, relying on Internet downloads would have given even the most ardent music-lover pause. A CD typically holds between 450MB and 750MB of audio data. Even
a single cut from a CD can be from 30MB to 50MB in size. Storing just a couple of files of that size taxes the hard drive of most home PCs. Another stumbling block is the 10 to 15
minutes it takes to download a 30MB audio file over the sluggish Internet connections used in most home setups. MP3 changed that. MP3, which stands for MPEG 1 layer 3, is a
highly compressed, digital file format for storing audio. It reduces the size of audio files for faster downloads and more efficient storage. What's more, few listeners are able to
distinguish the quality of music stored in an MP3 file from that of a CD.
MP3 began as an underground phenomenon, mainly used by independent musicians who wished to release recordings outside the industry mainstream. Like many things on the Net,
though, its commercial applications have been realized quickly. Record companies are regarding MP3 as a potential distribution medium, provided they can find a way to get paid.
Meantime, a number of small, portable devices capable of playing MP3 sound have already appeared. No bigger than a Walkman, they're capable of downloading and storing MP3
files, or similar ones, from a PC. Most are currently expensive, but historically, consumer electronics prices drop quickly as popularity and competition multiply the number of units on
the market.
The point, though, is that while record companies have so far mainly used MP3 to distribute sample cuts from new CDs, hoping to attract buyers, many observers believe it would be a
small technological step to distribute all music via the Internet , bypassing production of hard media altogether. And as if that forecast for the music business weren't chilling enough for
the likes of Cinram, there could be more bad news on the way. Set-top boxes with PC-like hard drives, designed to sit on the top of TV sets, may not be far from making
videocassettes yesterday's media of choice for recording and replaying television programs.
While perhaps premature, the forecast of the young lady in Vancouver was neither the first nor the only one of its kind. A few years ago, while head of technology at Geffen Records,
Jim Griffin pioneered the practice of posting rock songs on the Net. Griffin, who now heads a California-based consultancy that includes Microsoft among its clients, flatly says that
conventional retailing of packaged music on CDs, or even DVDs, will soon become history. Instead, he sees music being distributed on a subscription basis over the Internet , with
record companies managing sites containing their musical products.
"Today, we live in a world of transaction-based push," Griffin says. "Things are distributed; they are pushed and moved at the instigation of the provider. But we are moving to a world
where they are not pushed to us, but they are pulled at the instigation of users."
Brian Robertson, president of the Canadian Recording Industry Association, also thinks the Net will transform music retail operations. He envisions kiosks in stores that will make it
possible to download music selections from the record companies' Web sites via high-speed Internet connections. The downloaded files could then be burned onto blank CDs
purchased at the retail counter.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

51/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Robertson says one benefit for customers will be access to a wider range of music titles, including older ones from back catalogues that most stores can't carry on their limited shelf
space. Furthermore, downloads could be multimedia-capable and include album graphics, video and biographical material as well as music.
Bruce Haring, a technology reporter for USA Today and author of the forthcoming book Beyond the Charts: MP3 and the Digital Music Revolution , gives CDs about 10 more years
before they go the way of vinyl records.
Naturally Cinram's Ritchie thinks his company will continue to adapt and thrive. He insists that physical distribution will continue to be important. He describes as "optimistic'' industry
forecasts that 10% of music sales will be made via the Web within five years.
Bill Greenhalgh, president of Cinram's Americas division, points to the co-existence of radio, television and movies as evidence that new technologies are not necessarily mutually
exclusive of existing ones. "There is this assumption, always, that new technology comes along and there has to be a winner and a loser, a zero-sum game," says Greenhalgh. "And
that's really not how it happens."
Perhaps spurred by investors' concerns, expressed in a falling share price, Cinram established a new division last summer for Web applications. Greenhalgh won't discuss specific
plans for the site, but talks of using the Internet primarily as a marketing tool for the sale and manufacture of customized music CDs that are delivered physically to the customer.
Meantime, Internet technology continues to evolve, taxing the resources and ingenuity of the music and movie industries to keep up. One big change has been in the music market.
The baby-boom population bulge, the biggest music-buying group when it represented under-30s, has aged. But it hasn't given up its music-buying habit; boomers in the 40- to 59year-old demographic group have replaced under-30s as the primary buyers of CDs and tapes. Ritchie claims not to be concerned by under-30s, the demographic group most likely to
be downloading, distributing and exchanging MP3 files (both legitimate and bootleg ones) over the Internet . "They were never our customers to begin with," he says.
Music labels, though, may be eager to grab them as their customers, once the industry figures out how to bill buyers and prevent them from copying music illegally. Griffin suggests that
day may not be far off. He says music labels could manage a Web site containing their commercial product and split the proceeds with individual artists, basing payments on the
number of orders for individual songs or bundles of tunes. Griffin argues that the similar arrangements record companies already have with radio stations could be the model for the
agreement. But the end result would be a decreased need for music-formatted CDs.
Meanwhile, new technology already appearing could well supercede MP3. The recording industry has introduced an alternative audio-compression format called SDMI (Secure Digital
Music Initiative), which restricts where digital versions of music can be played. Portable players based on SDMI are expected to appear in the consumer electronics stores soon.
Anything else that reduces the potential for copying or pirating material is also likely to gain the support of software and music companies.
Jim Griffin figures even more refined technology could replace MP3 and SDMI before they become established. A group of cellular telephone manufacturers have developed a new
wireless application protocol, or WAP, that Griffin says could lead to the ubiquity of new, multimedia handheld devices over the next few years.
But Joel Tax, a Toronto-based digital -storage analyst with the Santa Clara Consulting Group of Santa Clara, Calif., wonders how many people will want to listen to music on their
cellphones. One reason for his doubts? "Use is charged by the minute," says Tax. He also challenges the notion that flash memory cards, mainly used in digital cameras, are a viable
storage medium for MP3 users; flash memory cards, he notes, are priced at about $100 for 64 megs, the digital capacity required for music. A cheap, blank CD, on the other hand, is
worth less than $2.
And where does Cinram fit in all the future scenarios? Tax, for one, is bullish about its ability to take advantage of the Internet , even at this late stage. He draws parallels between
music and software, pointing out that they're both distributed simultaneously on-line and physically through retail stores. Predictions that software-in-a-box would disappear have not
so far become reality. Tax sees no reason why CDs couldn't also co-exist with on-line music.
That would cheer Cinram's investors. But in any case, Rich Morrow, an equity analyst for CIBC World Markets, thinks pessimism about Cinram's fortunes has been overdone. He's
confident that the "exaggerated expectations of the Internet and the near panic valuations on Cinram" should subside for a company generating more than $640-million annually in
revenue. "From an operational standpoint," says Morrow, "Cinram is in great shape. Very strong balance sheet. They have good earnings, they have strong cash flows."
But he adds, disquietingly, that "other than getting out there and educating the market, which they are doing, and working at accelerating their earnings growth, which they are certainly
trying to do, it is pretty much outside of their control."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvat01k4l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

52/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

ENTERTAINMENT

Harry Knowles turns his passion into Hollywood power --- Man behind the movies' must-see Web site
Paula Parisi
1671 words
3 September 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

He describes himself as
`the biggest, reddest
thing you've ever seen!'
He knows reliability is his weak spot, an it's area
he's working to improve
AUSTIN, Texas - In the wake of The Blair Witch Project, deconstructing the Internet movie marketing phenomenon has become a popular sport. But does Hollywood really get it?
Studio executives prattle on about trailer downloads and driving E-commerce. They spend millions developing Web real estate, content rich and brimming with clips. Still, estimable
buzz has yet to spring from a corporate-run dot-com .
Meanwhile, from a cluttered room in his dad's basement in Austin, Harry Knowles fuels the zeitgeist with Ain't It Cool News ( www .aint-it-cool- news .com [http://www.aint-it-coolnews.com/]), the Web site consulted by many savvy Hollywoodites even before they spread their trades with their morning coffee. Drawing on reports from his network of "spies,"
Knowles churns out a combustible mix of script reviews, test screening reports and speculative news .
Some actually believe the site can make or break a film. "Harry is very powerful," concedes one studio Internet czar, who like many interviewed for this piece, would speak only on
condition of anonymity.
"It's become so insider," the executive continues, characterizing the site a must-read for those working in film. "I'll bet 80 per cent of his hits come from Los Angeles. Half his readers
want to see how their projects are doing and the other half are posting under aliases to create their own spin."
Like most powerful people, Knowles is not only respected but hated and feared. Agents send him scripts by the ton, hoping his good word will build momentum for their clients' projects.
Studios fly him to film sets, though that doesn't guarantee a glowing review, as the makers of The Mummy will tell you.
Privately, however, some of his professional contacts diss him, maddened that the buzz is beyond their control. "I don't want to legitimize what he does by commenting on it," says one
marketing source who regularly seeks exposure on the site. "I consider him a credible outlet, but let's face it, he doesn't have fact checkers. He is not a credible journalist ."
This sweltering summer day, the incredible journalist Harry Knowles is sitting cross-legged on his living room couch. The place is a riot of movie memorabilia, the walls a collage of
classic lobby cards and posters, interspersed with the occasional tribal mask. Scripts are stacked everywhere in piles 10 and 12 deep.
It's easy to see why some execs are cynical about Knowles. The studios spend anywhere from $10,000 to $50,000 (U.S.) per movie Web site, but cannot buy the intangible bang that
resonates from a big push on Harry's site. "There's really nothing else like him," says DreamWorks head of marketing Terry Press. "Harry is the Kleenex of the movie Internet news
sites. He was first, so he stands out."
And for all the success of the Blair Witch Project home page, when it came time for its producer, Artisan Entertainment, to premiere the film's trailer, they chose to show it on Ain't It
Cool News , passing over MTV. "It was all about driving links," says Artisan executive vice president of marketing John Hegeman. "The exposure we got on Ain't It Cool was pivotal in
giving us our first heavy bump in traffic to our own site."
In person, as on the net, the 28-year-old Knowles is larger than life. In his uniform of Hawaiian shirt and jeans, the carrot-topped web chronicler lives up to his own cheerful description:
"I'm the biggest, reddest thing you've ever seen!" It's mid-afternoon, morning for Harry, who thinks sleep is for sissies but manages his winks from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., after updating his
site.
He shows no sign of fatigue from the night before, when he and his dad Jay, a.k.a. "Father Geek," caught a screening of The Sixth Sense at the Tinseltown Theater and over to a
midnight show of John Carpenter's Escape From New York at the Alamo Draft House. The combination theatre and beer hall is Harry's fave hangout and "the cultural centre of film life
in Austin," according to Knowles, who holds court there like a star.
Indeed, his life comes prepackaged with the pathos to launch a thousand press kits. He spent his childhood tagging along to concerts and movie memorabilia shows with his dad, Jay,
who designed lighting for bands like ZZ Top and sold posters and comics on the side.
He attended Austin Community College and then the University of Texas, intending to fulfill his mother's wish that he become a lawyer. He had an epiphany while writing a paper on
Fritz Lang's Metropolis, and changed his major to radio, television and film. His mother died of alcoholism, and Harry quit school to manage the family and untangle her complicated
estate. He resumed his stint on the carny circuit, hawking cinemabilia and keeping an eye out for acting roles he could do on the side.
He landed the part of Fat Boy in 1991's The Ballad Of The Sad Cafe, and a few other small jobs, but they were few and far between. Then in early 1996 he had what he describes as
his tragically fateful superhero moment. "While carting a palette of movie posters, Harry Knowles fell and was paralyzed from the waist down," he says in the cheesy tone of a cartoon
voice-over announcer.
In true comic book fashion, the bizarre accident changed his life. Crippled and without insurance, Knowles refused the long-term medical treatment that would have bankrupted his
family, retiring to his bed where he utilized the only resources at his disposal - his hands, his head and the Internet - to research his injury.
He got hooked on the medium, becoming an avid newsgroup poster at sites like the Drudge Report, sharing views on political world events. "I quickly figured out I could do this myself,
but I decided to limit my focus to film because I didn't want to be known as `the liberal Matt Drudge.' " He launched his site that year.
Ain't It Cool chugged along until Harry hit the Hollywood radar with Batman & Robin. Some high-level executives believe the bad buzz stemming from his early test screening reports
killed the film. Knowles shrugs. "I only had 50,000 readers then. Not enough to kill a movie."
Unless 10,000 of them happen to be press. The scoop-driven nature of Knowles' site has made him a media magnet - tip central, though responsible journalists thoroughly vet his
tidbits. Knowles estimates he did three to four hundred interviews in the months prior to Batman & Robin's release.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

53/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Knowles' reputation was cemented with Titanic. The test screening reviews he posted in July 1997 were in effect the December release's first reviews. And he had himself a scoop: his
were the first reports that the film was actually good. Knowles' ability to mobilize armies of guerrilla screening infiltrators made him a force to be reckoned with. He had resources
conventional journalists didn't have. That doesn't mean he's always right. His gushy review of Godzilla earns him jeers to this day. And many of his "rumours" don't pan out to be true.
"If you're a press person you confirm what you hear, you don't just report hearsay," says one studio publicity chief that offers him no access. "You're either a journalist or a guy having
fun on the Internet . You can't have it both ways."
Both Press and Hegeman beg to differ. "Sure, there are times where he's upset the apple cart," Press says. "What working journalist hasn't? That's part of the game." Hegeman
acknowledges he's fast and loose, but characterizes Ain't It Cool as "nimble and creative in a true indie spirit."
A good handful of studios fall somewhere in between. Neither supporters nor detractors, they don't cultivate the regular contact they would with a regular member of the working press,
but they will invite Knowles to movie sets and arrange special jaunts. Still, Knowles knows that reliability is his weak spot, and it's an area he's working to improve. But, he says, as a
one-man band he can't possibly check everything. (Aside from Knowles, AICN has only one paid employee, TV editor Glen Oliver.)
And Knowles isn't getting rich off his site - yet. For now the thrill of the chase is enough. Studio execs might be cynical, but anyone who's spent any time with him realizes Knowles is
more Frank Capra everyman than manipulative media understudy. The site is fueled by a love of film - Knowles' as well as his contributors' - that infuses it with its unique heat.
"He's passionate. Filmmakers respond to that. And let's face it, he's not dumb," says one observer. Knowles realizes he's at a pivotal point in terms of leveraging off his momentum.
He's working with a local film professional to craft a business plan and get AICN on track for a more professional future and expansion. After all, Matt Drudge is now a syndicated
columnist with his own TV show.
Executives who have trouble with Harry shouldn't get their hopes up that he'll go away soon. But like him or hate him, for filmmakers on the relentless quest for Internet buzz, all roads
lead to Ain't It Cool News .
, OR NOT: Harry Knowles' Web site Ain't It Cool (.aint-it-cool-.com) holds a combustible mix of script reviews, test screening reports and speculative .
Document tor0000020010830dv9300x72

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

54/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

NEWS

Here's how Canada's lingerie kings got online --- `What made me nervous is that this is a whole new medium'
Robert Cribb
1821 words
17 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

`I want to get excited when I see the screen. It has to be really, really sexy. You're not selling rock-grinding equipment here'
Karine Wascher
vice-president of marketing for La Senza
You run the biggest retail lingerie chain in Canada. You have a decade in the business, a high-profile name among female underwear shoppers and a coast-to-coast bank of 189 stores
and counting.
Then along comes the Internet .
It's a revolution , the headlines scream. It's changing the way people shop, turning brick and mortar retailers into dinosaurs. Suddenly, geography seems frighteningly irrelevant. U.S.based competitors are moving in on your turf. The market turns instantly borderless, potentially massive and focused on an as-yet untapped demographic in the lingerie business: men.
So, what are you going to do about it?
Well, you have to do something, La Senza executives decided. But do you invest big in a still-unproven medium that may well not offer immediate returns? Or do you dip the toe in, see
what happens, play it more cautiously than your flashy American competitor, Victoria's Secret? What should the company's online presence look like? How could it be different from
the rest?
After months of working through those issues, La Senza is launching its new Web site ( www .lasenza.com [http://www.lasenza.com/]) tomorrow, designed by Toronto-based ICE
Integrated Communications & Entertainment Inc.
It's the kind of new-age venture that's still speculative enough to induce sweat on executive foreheads, yet crucial enough to pry open corporate wallets. And the outcome can change
everything.
Here's the anatomy of a Web launch:
9 a.m., Feb. 26, 1999, La Senza offices, St. Regis Blvd., Dorval, Que.:
Steph Sebbag, ICE's senior account director, is trying to impress La Senza executives with his company's vision of how silken bras and lacy panties should look and feel online . La
Senza executives are tepid. Like kids sitting in front of broccoli, they know it's the right thing to do, but it still seems distasteful.
"They wanted to just put a few items up on a Web site and see what happened," says Sebbag. "But I convinced them to go big and represent their full product line. Otherwise, it could
do more harm than good."
The Canadian lingerie kings know how to get women into the stores and up to the cash registers. But online ? Do people buy underwear they haven't touched or seen? Who are these
people?
"What made me nervous is that this is a whole new medium and it is difficult to touch," says Laurence Lewin, president and founder of La Senza. "I can open stores throughout Canada,
but this was the strangest thing."
A month later, Lewin and Sebbag shook on a deal that would give ICE $200,000 to create an online buzz around La Senza.
In an unprecedented move for the lingerie giant, which is owned by Suzy Shier Ltd., the project budget came with no expectations on return on the investment, says Lewin.
"We budgeted for expenses, not revenues. There's no parallel in the real world. It's entirely unique."
9 a.m., June 17, 1999, ICE board room, 489 Queen St. E.:
Sebbag is in front of the executives again, this time with ICE's design and technical staff. Cloistered in a corporate board room filled with computer screens and trendy, soft-toned
wallpaper, Sebbag is talking the talk, peppering his pitch with the techno buzzwords that soothe the soul of a nervous retailer venturing into this foreign world.
The Web site must be intuitive, he says, seamless in its delivery, an immersive experience for the shopper.
Then, you need promotion - contests, newspaper , radio and magazine ads and media partnerships.
Take this newspaper -ad idea, for example, to run on the stock pages in the days leading up to the launch: "This fall, it's a Bare Market."
Underlying all this brainstorming is a clear focus: Find ways to show up arch-enemy Victoria's Secret. Wherever the online lingerie bar sits, it's Victoria's Secret that placed it there.
The company was the first big lingerie name online and remains the leader.
The Web site ( www .victorias [http://www.victorias/] secret.com) "has brought new customers to the brand for the first time," according to company literature. "About 60 per cent are
male, and as much as 25 per cent of the total visitors on a daily basis are from foreign countries."
Intimate Brands, the company that runs the world's sexiest company, teased potential lingerie buyers with a 30-second ad that aired during the first quarter of last year's Super Bowl
game, directing viewers to the company's Web site. Then came full-page ads in national newspapers , including the Wall Street Journal.
But when the cyber-curtain opened, many online viewers, lured to the site by the promise of scantily clad supermodels, watched the words "Please Stand By" flash across their
screens for half an hour as computer lines clogged.
The lesson was not lost on La Senza and ICE officials. They will offer no online fashion show. But that doesn't mean the general idea of luring men to this new online lingerie
paradise can't work, the planners think.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

55/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Just as the competition's online fashion show idea was aimed squarely at the testosterone crowd, La Senza will appeal to its hypothetical new male audience with a seductive online
video featuring still shots of models in, ahem, lingerie. It isn't live and it isn't as technically demanding. But it is sexy. And that's the name of the game.
"I want to get excited when I see the screen," Karine Wascher, vice-president of marketing for La Senza, tells the meeting. "It has to be really, really sexy. You're not selling rockgrinding equipment here. You have an opportunity here to showcase beautiful women in beautiful clothes. Take advantage of it."
But what about beautiful men?
While lingerie is La Senza's bread and butter, the company also sells men's underwear. So, do you include shots of men in robes and boxers in the site's video montage?
Sebbag is clear: "Most people looking at this are men and if you throw pictures of men in here, they'll go, `Yuck!' "
Eventually all agree; women only.
"Everything is on track," Heli Tuomi, ICE's project manager, tells the La Senza representatives. "We're looking good for an Aug. 18 launch."
2 p.m., July 27, 1999, ICE offices:
The deadline has now been pushed back several weeks and the budget has been pushed up to $300,000.
"I'm not sure La Senza understood what they were getting into," says Mike Stewart, lead technical person on the project for ICE. "It's a hugely complex project and some things you just
don't want to rush."
This creative meeting in the cosy, second-floor office strewn with computer gadgetry, is a kind of refocusing effort attended by four designers and technical people. The site itself is still
in test mode.
And much of the originally conceived look and feel of the site has changed .
"From the first design until now, it's very different," says Kitty McKechnie, lead designer. La Senza executives "have a strong vision. And there's been more back and forth than normal
this time."
The front page, a sleekly designed eye catcher featuring a horizontally posed model with a supercilious gaze, has the La Senza stamp of approval.
ICE staffers have also figured out how to let shoppers zoom in on the photos of online lingerie with a few clicks.
"This will give us a competitive advantage," says Sebbag. "People want to touch and feel clothes, and we're bringing that one step closer."
But there's still haggling over design and photos on some of the inside pages.
"The client doesn't want black," says one staffer pointing to a darkened background on one of the pages. "They want softer colours."
"Marketing people don't like black," says another. "I can't figure it out. It looks great."
The ICE team has also put together the so-called flash movie, a short online movie featuring still shots from the La Senza photo shoot.
Accentuated by the thumping disco beat, the alluring images pass by in rapid fire, eye candy for the about-to-be-tempted online shopper.
Conversation turns to customer service.
"Victoria's Secret just won an award for best customer service on the Web," says Sebbag. "So that's what we're up against."
And promotion is still up in the air.
Sebbag is planning the online media launch with Web banner ads, buying keyword searches in popular search engines, advertising inserts in Visa bills and a deal for exposure in
Modern Woman magazine.
The launch is reset for late September.
1 p.m., Oct. 13, 1999, ICE offices:
Fully two months after the original launch date, ICE staffers are putting the final touches on the site, preparing for a Monday launch.
Some of the original vision has changed .
No big promotional splash led up to the launch, for example. Newspaper , magazine and online ads have not been placed. And the company's promotional deal with Modern Woman
tanked after the magazine folded recently. Sebbag is now working on a similar deal with Chatelaine.
"Promotion is on hold," he says. "We want to get things up and running before we starting drawing too much traffic."
Still, Lewin claims 200 shoppers have already found the site and ordered in the past week. And 40 per cent of them are from the United States, a market La Senza has never before
tapped, who are looking to cash in on attractive exchange rates.
The site's budget has continued to climb throughout the two-month delay. It's now well above $300,000, although no one will reveal the final price tag.
Still, whatever the cost, it's a bargain, says Sebbag. Web endeavours that carry a company's brand name into a new medium and a new market have a value far beyond the
development dollars and cents. In an increasingly wired world, the Web sites will determine the future success of the enterprise.
Creeping costs, moving deadlines, it's all part of getting it right. Because, if you don't, the long-term cost could be immeasurable.
"We had no choice but to do this," says La Senza's once-cautious Lewin.
"But my attitude has become much more optimistic as we've worked through it. This is really a store. We treat it as a store. The only difference is that it's a store without geographic
limitations."
Document tor0000020010830dvah010yu

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

56/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Commentary

Get UN peacekeepers into East Timor Canada should do everything it can to ensure that a part of the world whose tortured
history has only recently been thrust into the light of international attention does not return to an obscure terror
NICK DYER-WITHEFORD
1254 words
6 September 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A9
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

London, Ont. -- The news came last Thursday that the BBC was pulling its correspondents from Dili. Armed militias opposing the island's independence from Indonesia had made the
streets dangerous for foreign correspondents, not to mention bringing further mayhem to a people already all too familiar with extreme violence. Since then, thousands of people have
fled to neighbouring islands over the weekend and 150 foreign journalists have pulled out.
After the week's earlier, amazing coverage of vast numbers of Timorese -- by most estimates well over 90 per cent of the population -- defying intimidation to vote in the United-Nationssupervised referendum on the island's future , reports of the flight of journalists and observers struck me with foreboding. A part of the world whose tortured history has only recently
been thrust into the light of international attention seems set to spiral down yet again into an obscure terror.
As a teacher of international media studies, I have over the past 20 years been alternately appalled and inspired by events in East Timor. Appalled, because for so many years the story
of its invasion and occupation by Indonesia was veiled from the Canadian public by neglect in mainstream news channels. Inspired, because recently a handful of journalists , media
critics and political activists has helped lift this veil, and in doing so contributed to the prospects of a more livable and just future for the people of East Timor.
But what is happening now in Dili and elsewhere on the island shows that international observation and news coverage are not enough. Canadians need to move from awareness to
action. Our government must exercise its influence to ensure the dispatch to East Timor of a UN peacekeeping force to prevent a deepening of a tragedy that already rates alongside
those of Rwanda and Kosovo.
If news of events in Timor is today on the front page of every major newspaper , it is as well to remember that this was not always the case. When Indonesian paratroopers
descended on the island in December, 1975, Australian reporters were among their first victims. Yet international media devoted scant attention to the invasion; this coverage actually
downplayed Indonesian massacres and atrocities.
That such a nightmare regime, to which that overworked term "genocidal" can probably be fairly applied, was allowed to work invisibly to the outside world is one of the great
journalistic scandals of our era. It can be cited in support of every theory that portrays our Western "free" press as subordinate to the influence of governments, which saw the
Indonesian state as a vital Cold War ally, or the corporate sector, which saw it as a lucrative commercial partner in the development of one of Asia's most populous and resource-rich
markets.
There is, however, another side to this story. In the early 1990s, the cloud of obscurity that had been allowed to settle over the slaughter in Timor was disturbed by various forms of
media critique, investigative journalism and political activism.
Three events stand out. One was the film Manufacturing Consent, in which linguist Noam Chomsky provided a scathing analysis of mainstream media silences about East Timor; it was
probably the first mention of the island that many of the film's audience had heard. This was followed in December of 1992 by two British television journalists ' filming of a massacre
of student demonstrators by Indonesian troops in Dili. Although such killings had long been routine in Timor, it was the first time they had made it to the top of the 6 o'clock news .
The third factor was less dramatic but as important. For many years, small groups of activists in the West, such as the Canadian-based East Timor Alert Network, had attempted to
draw international attention to the situation on the island. In the 1990s, these groups began to make increasing use of the Internet to circulate information coming directly from the
Timorese resistance. Photographs of the torture victims posted on the World Wide Web , and daily bulletins from on-the-ground sources in Timor flashing almost instantaneously
around the world, contradicted the propaganda claims of the Indonesian government and constituted an increasingly convincing indictment of Western states' complicity -- a powerful
example of "cyberactivism."
These various beams of media attention contributed to a gradual but powerful shift in international public opinion over Timor. Without such coverage, for example, the Nobel Peace
Prize would not have been awarded to Jose Ramos Horta and Bishop Carlos Ximenes Belo, leaders of the Timorese resistance. The growing tide of international criticism contributed
to, and was in turn reinforced by, the rise of the opposition movements within Indonesia, culminating in the student uprising last year that finally ejected Suharto from office.
It was in the wake of these events that the Indonesian government finally agreed to a UN-supervised referendum on the future of Timor. What a difference 30 years can make. In past
weeks media crews flooded into Dili to cover the referendum; what was once a bloody backwater in the flows of international news coverage has claimed the headlines. As expected,
the Timorese voted decisively for independence from Indonesia.
But the story is far from over. The leaders of the pro-Indonesian militia -- more properly, armed thugs -- have made explicit their intentions to "slaughter" independence supporters and
plunge Timor into civil war. One of their immediate objectives is to expel anyone who might report to the outside world on the havoc they and their clandestine allies within the
Indonesian army and police forces intend. Not only foreign news crews but also Indonesian journalists have been forced to flee. The lights are being turned out, so that killing can
proceed under cover of dark.
Indonesian authorities appear unable, and in many cases unwilling, to stop militia and military violence in East Timor. It is clear that Indonesian troops should be withdrawn, and
replaced by peacekeepers with a mandate to protect civilians and disarm the militias. Canada can do something to make this happen.
Over the past decades, apologists for various forms of governmental, commercial and academic co-operation with the Indonesian regime have always justified their stand by talking of
"quiet influence." Rather than simply ceasing support for the invader and occupier of Timor, it was preferable, so the argument went, to be constructively engaged with the Indonesian
regime in order to influence it in the direction of democracy and respect for human rights.
To me, the influence seemed to run the other way; the APEC pepper-spray incident showed how much the Canadian state had learned from Suharto about the repression of protest. Be
that as it may, now is the time for the advocates of "quiet influence" to work their magic, if they have any. It is clear that the Habibie regime is divided and uncertain how to handle this
crisis. Canada should use its diplomatic and commercial leverage with the Indonesian government to persuade it to accept a UN peacekeeping force on East Timor.
In the absence of such an international presence, the island may sink again into an invisibility that favours only the forces of chaos. Nick Dyer-Witheford is an assistant professor in the
faculty of information and media studies at the University of Western Ontario.
Document glob000020010827dv9601abz

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

57/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

What's a parent to do? --- The Internet is still a potentially dangerous place for kids, and parents are worried. Here's a guide
to help you `Netproof' your kids.
Peter Krivel
2465 words
23 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
FF01
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

The Internet is a wonderful place for kids. It offers tremendous opportunities to explore new ideas, visit foreign lands, meet other youths, and participate in challenging games.
Unforunately, the Net is also a potentially dangerous place for kids. Beneath the happy exterior is a seamy underbelly where unsuspecting people can come across everything from
blatantly tasteless and offensive content, to contraband like child pornography and hate literature - or even sites that give step-by-step instructions on how to make a terrorist bomb.
It's one of the major concerns expressed by parents these days. And with good reason. Young surfers, innocently searching for terms like Winnie the Pooh, the Spice Girls or even
Minnie Mouse or Pokemon, can be directed to Web sites with far more salacious fare.
Worse still, your 12-year-old daughter could find herself in a chatroom talking to a 40-year-old pedophile stalking his prey.
Detective inspector Bob Matthews heads up the Ontario Provincial Police Project P unit. It comprises 16 officers who search for purveyors of child pornography. Its mandate is narrowly
defined, yet the officers come into all the seedier areas of the Net.
"We are fairly narrowly focused and only do child pornography investigations," he says. "But that may lead us - and often does lead us -into other investigations such as sexual assault.
And child porn is an actual picture of a crime in progress involving the sexual assault of a child."
Matthews says his unit is running at full capacity. As of late last month, it executed 64 search warrants, laid 92 charges, arrested 24 people and began 90 new investigations.
"And it's fair to say that 99 per cent of those cases involved a computer or the Internet in some way," he says.
Matthews says most phone calls he receives from parents involve a son or daughter who has met someone off the Net and got involved in a sexual affair.
"One of the problems is that the age of consent is 14 years of age," he points out. "Parents have called that their 15-year-old daughter has just run away with some 30-year-old chap
that they've met on the Internet and is involved in a sexual relationship. And there's nothing we can do about it providing that that individual is not a person in authority."
Another problem, according to Matthews, is that pedophiles are masters at manipulation. They're masters at determining the vulnerability of a child and then preying on it.
"And they almost have a sixth sense at it," he says. "So, if they can identify a child . . . then can arrange a meeting, they'll do that and they'll travel miles to do it."
Added to this is the naivete of children. They'll hear someone describe themselves as a 19-year-old, blue-eyed blond hunk, but when they meet him, they discover he's much older and much less attractive.
"By that time it's too late," Matthews says. "By that time they've put themselves in a position and then it just goes on from there."
The issue of parental control is so important that the American Federal Trade Commission recently unveiled a set of child protection rules that affect Web sites aimed at children.
Under the rules, which go into effect April of next year, U.S. sites must get explicit parental permission before disclosing any child's personal information to a third party.
In a 1997 poll on Internet use in southern California, 17 per cent of parents said they would ban Internet use entirely if they found their kids tapping into online porn.
But many experts say pulling the plug is a short-term solution at best.
"The Internet isn't going to be less important 10 years from now than it is today. It'll be more important," says Silvio Bonvini, who manages Candystand.com, a game-oriented Web site
sponsored by foodmaker Nabisco.
"You'd be doing a real disservice to your kids if you cut them off from the Internet entirely."
Plus, frankly, it's not possible.
The Internet is no longer exclusively an at-home medium. Libraries, coffee shops, schools - all offer some level of Internet access, often without adult supervision.
Eventually, experts say, every kid who uses the Internet will use the Net without a parent or other adult in the room. And when they do, they'll probably encounter some type of lurid
material.
How do you let a kid explore the fun and increasingly necessary information to be found on the Net, while also protecting young eyes from adult-oriented fare?
There's really only one real solution - parenting. When parents communicate their values about everything from smut to violence, experts say their children, even at a young age, can
surf safely online .
"It all depends on the supervision that is provided to the child," Matthews says. "The more streetproofing of children and parental supervision, the safer the children are. It's no different
than how safe are our children on the streets. Do we as a parent allow them to do what they want and come in whenever they want? Or do we have some kind of controls and
accountability and how we oversee what they do?"
According to Matthews, the Number 1 thing a parent should do is make sure the computer is located in a central location in a home.
"Virtually every time we've had an investigation where a child has got involved in child pornography, the computer was in their bedroom or down in the basement," he says.
Matthews also says children should never meet anyone they've come across on the Internet without their parents being there.
"And they should never give out personal information about themselves or their family to unknown people fron the Internet ; people they haven't met face to face."
And parents should tell them to feel free to report to them things that make them feel uncomfortable, he says.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

58/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

(For other rules suggested by U.S. National Centre for Missing & Exploited Children see sidebar at right.)
Technology can be part of the answer. Software can help you sift, block and navigate the Internet in ways that'll block out most of the stuff you find offensive.
You might try blocking access to objectionable sites and people and that might be as easy as configuring your Web browser.
Netscape has the NetWatch function, accessible through home.netscape.com/support.
When anyone uses Netscape Navigator to access a Web page, NetWatch compares the page's rating with the levels you have determined to be acceptable.
If a page contains higher levels than the ones you have set, NetWatch prevents the page from being displayed. You can also set NetWatch to block pages that have not been rated.
Settings are protected by a password. If you decide to view a page that NetWatch has blocked, you can temporarily disable NetWatch protection by entering your password.
Microsoft's Internet Explorer provides a few features, from using Web rating systems to guide what sites you can access to password protecting the entire browser.
You can get a step-by-step explanation of how to block Web sites at www .microsoft.com/Train_Cert/ffie3/ [http://www.microsoft.com/Train_Cert/ffie3/] browser/prsnrate.htm.
There are also a number of products available that block access to Web sites containing controversial material.
Some also prevent access to the computer during specified hours, while others provide parents a log of the Web sites visited by their children.
And some prevent access to such Web services as Internet Relay Chat (IRC), one of the most popular destinations for children on the Net.
An excellent site to visit is www .worldvillage.com/wv/school/htm [http://www.worldvillage.com/wv/school/htm] l/control.htm which lists the most popular programs out there. Many of
them offer free downloads so you can evaluate them.
Also included is an extensive list of child-friendly Web browsers.
Or, try www .getnetwise.org [http://www.getnetwise.org/] where you can learn about the risks children face on the Internet based on age level and also search for the specific software
you want by checking various boxes.
(For a brief intro to some of the products, see sidebar at far right.)
One of the kicks against filtering programs is that they often block access to sites with perfectly legitimate content. For example, the word "breast," which can be found on a cancerrelated Web site concerning breast cancer might be blocked.
AOL once attempted to censor words with a sexual connotation in discussion lists. There was no problem until people in the breast cancer forums complained that they could not
continue their conversation because the word "breast" wasn't allowed. Also complaining were people in the newsgroup alt.recipes.chickens; and members of the groups discussing
horse breeding also found their discussion cut off. AOL's programs could not distinguish between human and equine sexuality.
AOL eventually reviewed its policy and changed the rule.
Matthews feels that parental control software is adequate for young children but kids today have grown up with computers and will eventually find a way to get around the software.
"Children today are computer-literate and many parents are computer-illiterate," he says. "So parents should make every effort to become more computer-literate and check the
computer to see where their kids have been."
Then there is Internet Relay Chat, which enables people to communicate with each other in real time by typing messages.
Conversations take place in channels, which most often are dedicated to specific topics. But discussions quite often stray from the course. Commercial online services such as AOL
also offer chat facilities.
Chat rooms are enormously popular with kids. A survey by the magazine Zillions, found that chatting was ranked highest by the children it surveyed and that one-third of them reported
having problems with other users in the rooms.
The most common problems are: profanity; asking for personal information and e-mail address; inappropriate advances; and adults visiting chat rooms set aside for children.
Several filtering software programs provide a feature that prevents children from transmitting their name and other personal information. However, there is no foolproof way, other than
blocking Internet chat room access altogether, to prevent a child from communicating their name and address.
For information on chat room behaviour for youths, visit www .cyberangels.org [http://www.cyberangels.org/].
If your child is harassed while online , you should try contacting the ISP of the harasser. In some cases, the abuser will be removed from the system. Larger ISPs such as AOL provide
a specific e-mail address to report inappropriate behaviour.
A few Internet service providers in the U.S. offer child Web filtering. The closest a Canadian ISP would come to that is America Online Canada, which provides controls for the World
Wide Web and e-mail.
Approximately 80 per cent of AOL's 18 million worldwide and 130,000 Canadian household memberships take advantage of it, says AOL spokesperson Joan Simkins.
Each AOL account comes with five screen names and five e-mail addresses so all members of a household can have their own private access and explore what's on the AOL network
as well as the Internet , Simkins says.
But when the master account holder sets up the software, he can go to a password-protected parental control area and customize access for children.
"We have a kids-only level for children under 12," Simkins says. "It limits where they can go on the Web and they can't get out unless it's designated a kids only site."
From there the surfer can graduate to a level for young teens and get a bit more access, and then mature teens with even more freedom.
"What you can also do is specify the e-mail addresses that the child can receive e-mails from," Simkins says. "If the child is 12 or 15, you might want to ensure that they only receive emails from people they know. So you can put in the actual e-mail address of their friend."
Jean Geb uses AOL's parental control features but still needs to keep an eye on her 12 and 14 year olds.
"AOL does a fair to good job with parental controls," she says. "But as you know, where there's a will, there's a way, and even with careful screening, a lot of stuff slips through the
cracks. And it's almost always something connected to porn sites, pictures, language and jokes."
Geb says even the age-regulated chat rooms aren't secure and that it's an easy area for an undesirable with ulterior motives to enter and try to engage the young people in gross
language, explicit sexual acts, etc.
"If a weirdo, of any age, knows a screen name in the parental control area, they can enter the chat rooms and do their thing," she says. "And it's almost always bad news ."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

59/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

She says that without these controls, her kids could access anything on the Web, especially the sex sites.
"I think curiosity might overcome any taboos for those sites," she says. "Also, it's dangerous to allow unsuspecting teens to roam the Net or enter a non-specified age chatroom. There
are too many weirdos out there, and I don't want my kids exposed or endangered by any of it. So, the best that can be done is parental controls, and keep an eye on it."
Another way of policing your children is through systems, such as www .rsac.org [http://www.rsac.org/] and www .safesurf.com [http://www.safesurf.com/], where ratings are assigned
to individual Web sites.
There are also search engines devoted to children. Try www .hhpl.on.ca/library/kidseng.htm [http://www.hhpl.on.ca/library/kidseng.htm] for a comprehensive list, such as
www .ajkids.com [http://www.ajkids.com/] where your child can ask a simple question such as "Why is the sky blue?" or http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/KidsClick!
[http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/KidsClick!] a site created by a group of librarians that will point your child to age-appropriate Web sites.
Geb says a carefully thought-out plan of monitoring and education of your children should provide them the ability to use with ease of mind what the Internet is intended to provide.
"There is so much to learn on the Web and when they need to do that, my computer is always available to them," she says.
--Peter Krivel is a Toronto Star reporter. Send e-mail to pkrivel@thestar.ca.
xxxx LEADIN WORDS: xxxxx xxxxxx cutline words here.
Document tor0000020010830dvcn01acb

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

60/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

NEOPOLLYANNA
Focus

Spinning into control In the 12 years since he served as Brian Mulroney's press secretary, Bill Fox has had time to reflect on
why a guy he liked and respected became the most reviled politician in Canadian history.
MURRAY CAMPBELL
1801 words
1 May 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D3
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- Have lunch with Bill Fox and you quickly learn that he has played on both sides of the street.
The first to come over to the table at the Movenpick restaurant tucked on the ground floor of CBC building is Pamela Wallin. Nearly 20 years ago, she was a colleague of his at The
Toronto Star -- "a soulmate," she says -- and earlier in the week she had him as a guest on her CBC Newsworld show.
A half-hour later, Charlie McMillan comes and sits down. The two are friends from the days when both served in the Prime Minister's Office under Brian Mulroney. They share laughs
from the old days.
"Canada," says Mr. Fox, with a sigh as he settles back into eating his salad and cranberry juice. "It's a village of about 3,000 people."
And he knows most of them -- particularly if they had anything to do with journalism or politics in the past 30 years. Many of them were surfacing this week, in the wake of the
publication of his book, Spinwars (Key Porter), to sing his praises and tell tales about life in the trenches.
Mr. Fox, 51, is, in his own assessment, a "first-time author with a past." A native of Timmins, Ont., he fashioned a respectable career in journalism , first as a newspaper reporter at
the Ottawa Citizen, then working for Southam in Quebec before he went to Washington with The Star.
His profile became considerably higher when Mr. Mulroney lured him to Ottawa in early 1984 from his job in Washington. Mr. Fox soon discovered there is more notoriety in being a
flack than in being a hack. As Mr. Mulroney's press secretary (later director of communications), he stickhandled a series of political scandals -- notably the resignation of a cabinet
minister caught in a German stripjoint and another over cans of tainted tuna -- and emerged in 1987 scarred and linked indelibly with the most unpopular prime minister in Canada's
history.
His three years in Ottawa putting out brush fires and dealing with an increasingly cynical press corps left their mark. In the past decade, there have been long periods of reflection
punctuated with sojourns at universities -- Carleton, Harvard and Columbia -- as he sought to understand why a guy he liked and respected became the most reviled politician in
Canadian history.
For the past 12 years, when he wasn't pursuing his studies, he has continued to work as a media-relations consultant -- initially with Earnscliffe Strategy Group in Ottawa and now with
Enterprise Canada Consultants Ltd. in Toronto.
He divides his time between Toronto and Manhattan where his wife, Bonnie Brownlee (a former aide to Mila Mulroney), is a media-relations executive with Bloomingdale's department
store. The couple have three grown children.
The book began as a preoccupation but evolved into an obsession.
"What I really wanted to try to understand better was how it reached the peak that it did, the level of cynicism and mistrust, because you couldn't explain it strictly on a policy basis," he
says.
Spinwars is an attempt to lay out the larger forces at work in the interplay between journalists and politicians and how this affects public policy. Mr. Fox imbues it with a noble goal:
"It's simply a search for a return to civility in our public discourse."
The book is partly theoretical but it is also hugely anecdotal.
Considering that many of the experiences Mr. Fox relates deal with Mr. Mulroney, it's a miracle it got published it all. He began working on it in the early days of what we now know as
the Airbus affair. There was skepticism that he was writing an apologia for his former boss.
"The only question was whether I was the architect of it or merely an agent," he says.
The book is ostensibly about spin -- the age-old practice of, as Mr. Fox puts it, "trying to get people to see something from your perspective."
At a deeper level, however, it is about how coverage of politics became fixated on strategies and competitions at the expense of policies and programs. It is an exploration of how
people like Mr. Fox and other backroom apparatchiks elbowed cabinet ministers out of the way and become central to news coverage.
He accepts some of the blame himself. When he arrived in Ottawa straight from covering Ronald Reagan's White House, he found the capital "hopelessly" enslaved to print culture,
although television was clearly the pre-eminent medium. "It seemed to me that if your assignment was media relations for the government you had to know something about it," he
says.
He worked on getting more access for television and radio reporters to the sorts of briefings and interviews that were routine for print journalists . More visibly, he planted Mr.
Mulroney behind a lectern emblazoned with Canada's coat-of-arms.
As a result, he was hit by a torrent of stories complaining about how he had imported a so-called presidential style to Ottawa. It was bogus, he complains: The lectern was a leftover
from Pierre Trudeau's era and it was there simply to help Mr. Mulroney keep his balance.
But the rap stuck. Mr. Fox reaches into his bag of theories to talk about the "dominant frames" of stories and the "congenial truths" that came to be shared by Parliament Hill reporters.
In his view, everything that Mr. Mulroney did was viewed through that prism.
And worse, the tendency of television to personalize issues led to a situation where the former prime minister was blamed for everything.
Mr. Fox laughs as he recalls how, as a defence mechanism, he would tell seatmates on airplanes that he was a life-insurance salesman. "They couldn't get behind that paper fast
enough."
In Spinwars, he gets his own back. He says the book is not meant to be simply a defence of the former prime minister -- "I really do try to make it broader than that" -- but it fits neatly
into the recent spate of articles and books that may one day refurbish Mr. Mulroney's image.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

61/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Large chunks of the book are devoted to dissecting the furor that erupted during the 1993 election about the attempt to privatize Toronto's Pearson Airport and to RCMP allegations that
Mr. Mulroney was involved in a kickback scheme related to Air Canada's purchase of Airbus jets.
The Airbus story particularly intrigues him because, he says, it was the result of a convergence of attitudes among press, politicians and the public. "Airbus is just a spectacular
example of all these forces that can go wrong at the same time," he says.
He argues that the story was grounded initially in the shared belief in Ottawa that Mr. Mulroney had presided over a government that had lost its moral compass. He says reporters and
politicians seized on rumour and innuendo to reinforce this so-called congenial truth. The public accepted the story because it was consistent with what they had been reading and
hearing about the former prime minister for a decade.
It was only later, after Mr. Mulroney launched a $50-million lawsuit and after it became clear that conclusive evidence supporting the charges was unavailable, that the attitude toward
him changed .
It took a massive counter-offensive involving equal amounts of theatrics and legal manoeuvres, but Mr. Fox argues that his former boss came to be seen as something of an underdog
in a fight with a vindictive justice establishment.
Mr. Fox finds consolation that the Airbus affair signalled the end of an era in political journalism . He argues that the emergence of so-called new media delivered by the Internet is
going to force spin doctors and reporters alike to change their ways because more Canadians will have access to a wider array of opinion.
"Spin wars," he argues, "as practiced over the past three decades, will be remembered as an artifact of an earlier media culture, a period piece of possible interest to future
anthropologists."
His discovery of the power of Web sites has lured him from the camp of the "declinists" -- those who argue that not all is well with the dumbed-down media -- to the side of the "neoPollyannists" who argue that new media will provide a liberation from old methods.
It's enough to make him think that he could even forsake spinning and go back across the street to his first craft: journalism .
"I really do have to decide what I want to do," he says.
THE BEST SPINMEISTERS EVER
Bill Fox has spun with, and been spun by, the best in the business. He worked as a reporter in Washington during the Reagan era and he spent three years at the side of Brian
Mulroney. He sees nothing sinister in spin; it's nothing more than putting a best foot forward.
Is it lying? "Emphatically not," he replies, "because you can never get away with a lie. Ultimately you will be found out."
Indeed, Mr. Fox was known as something of a wet blanket during his years in the Prime Minister's Office. Hugh Segal, who worked there as well, says Mr. Fox could be counted on to
curtail some of the more flamboyant attempts at spin doctoring. "Would there be any value," he would often add, "in relating this in some way to the truth?"
Former spin doctors concur this is the way it should be.
"Spin is basically hoping the press will print your version of events," says Patrick Gossage, a one-time press secretary to Pierre Trudeau. "It's not very full of malicious intent."
"It's trying to put the best light on facts," agrees Jim MacLean, who runs his own media relations firm and has worked with Liberal campaigns.
Mr. Fox says the best spin doctors are those who have access to the political leader so that reporters can be confident they are getting the straight -- or almost straight -- goods.
The best he encountered?
-- Michael Deaver (Ronald Reagan): "As expert as any in his time."
-- Jody Powell (Jimmy Carter): "Clearly part of senior management."
-- Peter Donolo (Jean Chretien): "Has enjoyed a significant level of success."
-- Bernard Ingham (Margaret Thatcher): "He had the advantage of the lobby privilege [under which an inner circle of Westminster reporters were given briefings that they never
acknowledged in print ] and he could say a lot of things with absolute confidence that he would be protected."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv5100ml5

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

62/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Web marketing --- So you wanna set up a Web site, do you? Here are 25 tips to help you carve out an effective Internet
presence.
S.J. Ross
1856 words
3 June 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Where can you give an international target market exactly the information they need, precisely when they want it, in the format and order they require? Where can you offer information
in venues ranging from text and static visuals (such as photographs and illustrations) to video, audio and animation? And where can you successfully compete internationally with major
corporations?
On the Web.
The World Wide Web , commonly called the Web, is a home for electronic sites, called Web sites. On your Web site, you can offer an enormous amount of information in a
tremendous range of formats. This means that your target market can access the information they want, in the format they choose, in the sequence they prefer and at the time of their
choice.
But, best of all, with the incredible immediacy the Web offers, not only can you post information the moment it becomes available, but by allowing your target market to contact you via
e-mail, you can nearly instantaneously respond to inquiries worldwide.
CREATION TOOLS: The easiest way to create a Web site is to use the Web site authoring capabilities, if available, in your existing software. For example, many word processing
applications, such as Corel WordPerfect 8.0, offer the ability to create Web pages. For more complex sites, you can purchase Web authoring software such as Microsoft FrontPage.
Both of these alternatives will insert the necessary codes (used to tell visiting browsers - software that allows the user to navigate the Web and read Web pages - how to properly
display the information, visuals and other elements on your site) in your files. However, if you wish to code your pages yourself, you can learn HTML (hypertext markup language) and
other computer languages or programs (such as CGI, PERL, and Java). Or, you could simply hire a Web site designer.
Once your site is designed, you post it on the World Wide Web so visitors can access it. To do this, you select a company to host your site, such as an ISP ( Internet service
provider). Your ISP will make your site accessible to the online world and may also provide additional services, such as e-mail capabilities. You can easily find an ISP by looking in
your telephone book, conducting a search on the Internet , or reading the advertisements in the technology section of your newspaper .
But before you do that, consider these 25 tips for creating a more effective Web site.
1. The three keys to a good site are content, design, and usage. To judge if you have a good site, ask yourself: is the content thorough, accurate, up-to-date, interesting and of target
market value? Are your pages attractive, appealing and easy-to-use in a variety of screen resolutions, in print as well as on screen, and with a range of browsers and versions of
browsers? Is your overall site unique, compelling, of perceived value and worth visiting repeatedly?
2. Designing a Web site is a continual balancing act. More interactivity provides more interest, but it may clutter your site. More visuals may make your site more appealing, but it may
slow site upload. The trick is to provide just enough to provide value and promote your company and offering while maintaining ease of use.
3. The current trend is to have an entry page before your home page. Called a splash page, this is like the cover to your book while your home page is like your table of contents. Be
aware, however, that on the plus side, the splash page can set the tone of your site, but, on the negative side, it is an unnecessary extra step for visitors. You must judge for yourself if
including a splash page is a plus or a minus for your target market.
4. Using the home page as a table of contents immediately orients your visitors. Using icons or other visual elements (such as colours) to delineate site sections also helps your visitors
to navigate your site.
5. Because some visitors turn off their graphics options, if you use icons as navigational devices, you must also provide text-only navigational tools to aid these visitors.
6. Because your visitor could enter your site at any page - not necessarily your home page - help your visitor by ensuring that clear site navigational information is offered on all pages.
If your site is large (50 or more pages) or intricate (numerous subgroupings), provide a site hierarchy chart, called a site map, to help your visitors orient themselves.
7. Consistently provide the same style and location of navigation options throughout your site. Why? Once your target market has learned where your navigational options are and how
to access them, they will find it annoying and frustrating to be forced to learn a new set of rules for every new page or group of pages.
8. If multiple distinct target markets will visit your site - such as consumers and experts - then provide separate informational paths for each target market. To do this, develop two
hierarchy charts - one headed by the home page consumer link for your consumers and the other headed by the home page expert link for your expert visitors. On your home page
provide two links, one for one target market (such as consumers) and another for another target market (such as experts).
9. As well as electronic contact information, also provide non-electronic contact information, such as your toll-free number. Why? Some people prefer to talk to a person and not
everyone has e-mail access (your visitor could be using, for example, an associate's Internet account).
10. To keep visitors repeatedly returning to your site, offer as much helpful information as possible. Ensure your information is as thorough as required. Update your information
frequently. Incorporate new features. Upgrade your games and tools. And ensure your links are active (that the site at the other end of the link is still there) and still of value.
11. Many of your visitors have the same questions about your offering, your company and your site. To help them, post an FAQ (frequently asked questions) page.
12. Don't forget to include critical site information such as copyright and disclaimers. And, of course, don't forget to include the obvious, items like your company name.
13. Because the online attention span is short - people tend to quickly browse, only stopping to review material that is of immediate interest or need - structure your copy so it readily
lends itself to browsing. To do this use simple language, short sentences, brief paragraphs and subheadings, bullet and number lists, and visuals. And always design your site so your
visitor can access precisely what they want in as few mouse clicks as possible.
14. Video, audio, animation and other Web site elements are fun to offer, but can readily detract from your sales message. Never forget that your Web site is a marketing tool. Ensure
that all the elements you offer enhance your sales message.
15. If you must include communication avenues, such as visuals, that are slow to load, place them at the bottom of the page with your copy at the top of the page. Why? This gives your
visitor something to read while waiting for your visuals to load.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

63/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

16. If you have multiple visuals, to ease the frustrations of speedy surfers, provide a text-only version of your site. Also provide files containing extensive copy (such as research results)
which your visitor can download without opening the files online .
17. Because your online audience is global, the opportunity for you to confuse or inadvertently offend your site visitor is far greater than with a more familiar, more contained target
market. Recognizing that your visitors are viewing your Web through many different cultural filters, it is wise to ensure that you do not use words or phrases that may offend your
international audience and visuals or graphics that will be unrecognized or misconstrued.
18. Unless you wish to alienate and frustrate many of your visitors, don't insist that they use a specific browser or a specific version of a browser to view your site, don't require your
visitors to download software, don't force them to accept cookies (small programs that catalogue information, such as e-mail addresses and pages visited), don't insist they register or
complete a survey or form, don't inundate them with multiple browser windows (when you click on an item it forces their browser to open as a second program to house the selected
screen). And always avoid "under construction" areas - not only is this a waste of visitor time, but, because your site is always somewhat under construction, it is redundant.
19. Be cautious about linking your site to other sites. Why? When your visitor leaves, odds are, they won't immediately return. And, ideally, you want your visitor to stay at your site for
as long as possible to receive as much of your sales message as possible. Subsequently, balance the value of offering links against the loss of your visitor.
20. The prices and conditions for ISPs can vary wildly from company to company. Shop around until you find an ISP that offers the fees and services that suit you best.
21. Your URL, or your uniform resource locator, is your Internet address. For the best Internet address, ensure you develop a URL that clearly states what your Web site contains, is
short, is easy to type, and is distinctively memorable (provided, of course, your ISP allows this - some insist on assigning you a URL). And, of course, don't forget to register your URL
(your ISP can help you do this).
22. To generate revenue, consider allowing banner advertising on your site. However, ensure that it does not overwhelm your site and that the advertised offering is related to, but not in
competition with, your offering. Alternatively, consider placing your own banner advertisements on other sites.
23. The more appropriate interactivity (not just games and e-mail) that you can incorporate into your site, the better. For example, a site that can detect which browser your visitor is
using and change to meet the specific needs of that browser is a valuably interactive site.
24. Track what your visitors do and where they go on your site for tips on where to fine-tune your information, visuals, and navigational structure.
25. Once you become comfortable with designing your Web site, consider incorporating info-bots into your site. These electronic mailboxes automatically respond to e-mail messages a handy tool for providing almost instantaneous response to predictable target market requests.
--Toronto-based writer S.J. Ross can be reached via e-mail at sjross@idirect.com.
BY THE BOOK: This article is excerpted from S.J. Ross' just released book, Smart Marketing On A Small Budget (McGraw-Hill Ryerson).
Document tor0000020010830dv6300i5f

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

64/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Tycoon embraces brave new Internet world
The Toronto Star
358 words
2 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

OXFORD, England (Reuters) - Media tycoon Rupert Murdoch sealed his conversion to the Internet yesterday, painting a picture of a bright technological future hampered only by
natural disasters and, worse still, meddling governments.
He told Oxford University students the Internet was a revolutionary liberator of the individual that would sweep away social inequality and meet all needs. The head of News Corp.,
who had been cautious about the World Wide Web , said the valuation of Internet companies such as Yahoo Inc. was "sometimes mystifying."
But he said such high values were easier to grasp if one believed the Internet 's value would grow exponentially once enough people were online .
"I am not among those who fear that new technology will widen the gap between rich and poor," he told students at the university where he studied - with, he confessed, a bust of Lenin
in his rooms - in the 1950s.
"We are not headed to a world in which the rich will have access to computers and related technology while the poor muddle along computerless. The new technologies are becoming
widely available."
Murdoch said the Internet empowers ordinary people by giving them knowledge others had previously hoarded.
He predicted a strong future for trusted brand names that people, burdened by unparalleled choice, would turn to for the information and goods they needed.
Hoping to ensure his News Corp. is among them, Murdoch this year paired with Japan's Softbank Corp. to invest in Internet companies, signalling he was embracing the revolution .
Murdoch predicted that as much change would occur in the next two to three decades as in the past 200 years, and suggested governments should embrace change , sell it to their
people and stand aside.
"Governments will have to get out of the way of change .
" Change is not only accelerating, its direction and consequences are becoming less predictable. Central planning is a dangerous game."
He said technology would help feed the world and raise living standards, if governments allowed it to.
"The only `social exclusion' we will see in the coming millennium will be the result of wrong-headed government policies."
Document tor0000020010830dvc2016g3

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

65/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

The identity thieves LOSING FACE Internet scam artists are prowling the Web for your personal information, looking to use
your name for fun -- and profit
Tyler Hamilton
2184 words
6 May 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

It took only 15 minutes before a scam artist tried to trick Maria Smith into revealing personal information when she registered on-line for a new Internet account with CompuServe Inc.
The culprit, who somehow knew that Ms. Smith was a new CompuServe customer, sent an E-mail claiming there was a problem processing her account and that she needed to
resubmit her data, including her membership password and credit card details. "If you wish to cancel your account, fill this table anyway and in the end write the word CANCEL," the Email advised her shortly after she signed up for her account last October.
At the bottom of the document were the words "John Debri, account manager."
Ms. Smith, who works in investor relations in Toronto, immediately became suspicious. "I started to think about it, and thought, 'This can't be right!' " After all, just receiving such an Email seemed to prove her account was working fine.
She forwarded the document to CompuServe's fraud department after a customer-service agent advised her that the message was bogus. The Internet service provider says it's
against company policy to request password and credit card information through E-mail.
Welcome to the anarchic world of the Internet , a global dumping ground for personal information that's being increasingly exploited by sleuths, hackers, thieves and tricksters eager to
collect data on people they'd like to impersonate -- for a profit. The next target could be you. There was a time when "identity theft" -- the use of another person's identity to commit
fraud -- was limited to pickpockets and people who sifted through garbage bins looking for old bank and credit card statements. But the Internet has changed the rules.
As access speeds become faster and databases more powerful, the Net has become the tool of choice to carry out identity crimes. Impostors can use information gathered on the Net
to access other people's bank accounts, to lease cars and to go on thousand-dollar shopping sprees on credit.
Add to that the availability of high-quality scanners, printers and graphics software used to print fake identification, and an identity thief's arsenal is even more compelling.
"It's the electronic frontier run amok," says David Flaherty, information and privacy commissioner of British Columbia, adding that the United States in particular has become a Wild
West for mischievous mouseslingers.
Both the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Office of Consumer Affairs call identity theft one of the fastest growing crimes in the United States. In response, an identity theft
bill was signed into law last October by President Bill Clinton. Those convicted of the crime can get up to three years in prison and be fined $250,000 (U.S.).
Canada has no such legislation. Neither the government nor the business community have been vocal about the issue.
The RCMP say only that they are aware of the problem and suspect it "probably is increasing," while the Canadian Bankers Association says it doesn't have statistics on the crime, but
probably should.
Bill C-54, the government's proposed privacy legislation, aims to restrict how an individual's personal information can be collected and used in the private sector, but it doesn't
specifically recognize or define penalties for identity crimes.
"It's brand-new territory," says Gene McLean, director of security at the Canadian Bankers Association in Toronto.
Ann Cavoukian, privacy commissioner for Ontario, says it would be a mistake to think that Canadians are less vulnerable to identity thieves prowling the Internet than their U.S.
neighbours. She says that trends beginning in the United States typically spread here.
The fact is, this country's high percentage of Internet users makes it a natural target for identity thieves. Half of Canadian households now have at least one person with regular
Internet access at home, work, school or somewhere else, according to the most recent survey from International Data Corp. (Canada) Ltd. In January, 1998, just 37 per cent of
households had such access.
Increasingly, those households are participating in on-line auctions, shopping in cybermalls and trading stocks electronically. More and more information on them is being stored in
databases. According to a 1998 survey by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, about 85 per cent of all Web sites collect some form of personal information from visitors.
U.S. congressman Bernard Sanders conjured up an eerie image when he introduced a bill to fight identity theft in 1998: "Someone, perhaps someone living in a country on the other
side of the globe, has stolen your name, your financial history, your identity, and used it to run up debts."
Ms. Smith, the new CompuServe customer, says the very thought of another person monitoring her Internet activity and collecting private information makes her feel uneasy.
"It's kind of scary, somewhere between me and CompuServe someone intercepted the line," she says. "I got the feeling CompuServe had heard of this before because they didn't seem
shocked."
Indeed, CompuServe is aware of the problem. Messages signed by "CompuServe Account Manager John Debri" have popped up in several countries since last fall.
"We already know about him. Delete the message and don't reply," a CompuServe help-line operator told the English periodical New Scientist in November.
Like Ms. Smith, magazine employees had only just set up a CompuServe account before receiving probing responses. "Within hours there was a dodgy E-mail from someone called
'Russiansexy.' Then, a week later, not one but two 'Urgent' messages arrived from different sources, each signed 'CompuServe Account Manager John Debri,' " New Scientist reported.
The messages asked for passwords and credit card details.
Fraud motivates most cases of identity theft.
In one highly publicized instance, Mari Frank, an attorney from Laguna Niguel, Calif., discovered that someone, using the Internet , had purchased a red Mustang convertible, racked
up an $11,000 bill at Toys "R" Us Inc., provoked a lawsuit by damaging a rental car and run up an additional $50,000 in debt, all in her name.
While the total loss to Ms. Frank was nearly $100,000, the actual cost to the victim often goes beyond a dollar count.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

66/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

In his September report, Canada's Auditor-General Denis Desautels wrote that identity theft can have severe consequences on innocent victims.
"Individual victims [of identity theft] can suffer injury to their reputation and must undergo the process of clearing their credit rating. In the interim, these individuals may be unable to
keep or find a job, obtain a mortage or secure a loan."
Mr. Desautels was referring to the growing problem of identity theft, in particular the abuse of social insurance numbers.
Anybody, with a little persistence and experience navigating the World Wide Web , could likely build a detailed profile of Ms. Smith without resorting to trickery, says Austin Hill,
president of Zero-Knowledge Systems Inc., a Montreal-based designer of privacy protection software.
Hackers and Internet scam artists are not the only ones on the prowl for your personal information. A big problem, Mr. Hill says, are publicly accessible databases on the Internet and
Web-based information brokers who will sell private data to anyone, for a fee.
"I could get all of your information probably within two hours," Mr. Hill confidently claims. "That's all it would take. Just with your name, I could get everything I need to create your
identity."
Typically ripe for the picking are social insurance numbers, credit histories, bank account information, driver's licence numbers, recent photographs, employment information and other
key identifiers often used as passwords, such as maiden names, birth dates, and even pet names.
Of course, obtaining such information from the Web is not in itself illegal. A Web site called www .discreetresearch.com [http://www.discreetresearch.com/], for example, charges
anywhere between $8 and $96 to locate people, find their phone numbers, dig up criminal, vehicle and business records, and even compile property reports detailing what and how
much a person owns.
The company describes the service as a way of "arming yourself with the truth." But the truth, unfortunately, can be used for less-than-honest purposes.
A service that compiles financial and lifestyle profiles of individuals, and sells geographically organized lists for a few cents a name is found at www .myprospects.com
[http://www.myprospects.com/]. Other information-broker sites include www .knowx.com [http://www.knowx.com/] as well as www .locateme.com [http://www.locateme.com/].
Lexis-Nexis, the popular U.S.-based research database, only recently agreed to regulate itself with respect to the data it was selling. The Internet service was criticized in 1996 when
privacy advocates discovered that U.S. social security numbers and other private information was available for a price.
Still, there's nothing like a free service. For budding identity thieves on a tight budget, standard Web search engines such as Yahoo, Alta Vista and Infoseek can be used to pull out
interesting tidbits about a person. Get enough, and a complete picture can begin to take shape.
B.C.'s privacy commissioner says some of the most regularly used places on the Net serve as hotbeds for information scavengers. "The most significant problem is people participating
in chat groups and discussion groups," Mr. Flaherty points out. "They have no awareness of how those groups can be searched."
Ms. Cavoukian agrees: "It's like shouting off the rooftops."
She says discussion-group Web sites such as Deja News do more than allow people to post messages on the Internet . The Web site archives messages posted to popular news
groups, making it possible for any stranger to type in a name or E-mail address and pull up postings that can stretch back years.
With so much personal data on the Internet and so many ways to track down this information, how can people protect themselves from being the next victims of fraud?
Ms. Cavoukian says the first thing people can do is make themselves and the institutions they deal with more aware. She says that banks, police and government departments in
Canada are unlikely to study the problem of identity theft unless there is a perceived need to do so.
"Keeping statistics on this assures that people will take it more seriously and creates awareness that this is a problem," says Ms. Cavoukian, who would like to see more hard Canadian
data on the issue.
Mr. Hill of Zero-Knowledge says the best way for individuals to combat high-tech forms of identity theft is by giving out false information when entering certain Web sites or by refusing
altogether to give out personal data.
A technological answer is to start using what's called "anonymizer" software, such as the Freedom program developed by Zero-Knowledge. By assigning people on-line pseudonyms,
these products make it possible for them to navigate the Web and engage in E-commerce without revealing who they are.
Mr. Hill says demand for this type of privacy software is exploding because more people are beginning to appreciate the need to offset the invasive nature of the Internet . "We need to
give people their control back."
Site seeing
www .identitytheft.org [http://www.identitytheft.org/] www .ipc.on.ca [http://www.ipc.on.ca/] www .dejanews.com [http://www.dejanews.com/]
www .discreetresearch.com [http://www.discreetresearch.com/] www .myprospects.com [http://www.myprospects.com/] www .knowx.com [http://www.knowx.com/]
HOW TO FOIL THE IDENTITY THIEVES
Identity theft is the act of assuming another person's identity to commit crimes, particularly fraud.
In the United States and Canada, the growing use of the Internet and electronic databases has made it easier for criminals to commit identity theft. As a result, it's considered by many
to be one of the fastest growing crimes in North America.
What can an Internet user do to avoid being a victim? Ann Cavoukian, privacy commissioner for Ontario, offers this advice:
Never send any personally identifying information in an E-mail. Look into buying encryption software that will ensure that the only eyes that see the message belong to the person
you're E-mailing.
When you go to a Web site, don't provide any identifying information, unless you and the business have established a trusting relationship. Banks, for example, are usually safe bets.
Avoid chat groups and news groups, or at least use an alias when posting messages in these open areas on the Internet .
Ask to be taken off commercial mailing lists.
Ask your credit bureau to attach a "fraud alert" note to your records, meaning that any request to change or access information in your file must be followed up by a call to your home.
If your credit bureau doesn't have a fraud alert service, ask why and explain its importance to the bureau.
Finally, empower yourself on the Internet by buying privacy-enhancing technologies, such as "anonymizer" software. The software lets you surf the Web and engage in E-commerce
transactions under a pseudonym without having to compromise your privacy.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv5600nj4

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

67/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Managing

IDG's bottom line: Print not dead STRAIGHT GOODS Founder Patrick McGovern sees his publishing and new media
concern's financial statements as proof that the latest technology doesn't automatically triumph.
TYLER HAMILTON
1010 words
25 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B16
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- When Patrick McGovern founded International Data Group in 1964, the printed word was king.
Thirty-five years later, new media reigns and are transforming the way people buy, learn and conduct business.
Does this mean print -- magazines, newspaper and books -- will ultimately die? Mr. McGovern insists IDG's financial statements are proof that print is alive and well.
IDG is a research, new media and live events company with 1998 revenue of $2.35-billion (U.S.) and more than 9,000 employees around the globe. Its unit, International Data Corp., is
among the top technology research firms. But IDG of Boston is also a publisher of books and magazines, including the popular For Dummies series of how-to titles and trade
magazines PC World, Macworld and Network World.
Mr. McGovern says IDG Books, created from a $2-million investment, has in the past eight years sold $600-million in books and made $150-million in profit. IDG's Internet division, by
contrast, was spawned out of a $68-million investment, and Mr. McGovern says he's still waiting for the recovery of that initial investment.
The message: new technology doesn't automatically triumph over old media.
"Human nature changes much more slowly," he says. "So the actual adoption of technology comes considerably more slowly than when it's practically available."
The Globe and Mail met recently with Mr. McGovern to probe his ideas on the future of media.
Are magazines and newspapers doomed because of the Internet , or are all the predictions from a few years ago proving wrong?
I expect that print advertising will take an enormous jump over all, because there's been $17-billion invested in Internet companies in the past 18 months. And I think about $1.5billion to $2-billion of that is going to be placed as advertising in the next 12 months, because [ Internet businesses] have to fight for mindshare in order to get visitors and activity. Also,
because they believe that the people who know their company will talk about it and will invest in it, they build up their market capitalization through advertising as well.
So we're going to see a very nice recovery in print advertising.
Why put the advertising in print , rather than on the Internet itself?
They have to establish brand, which means they have to go to print . . . . [An advertisement] won't be noticed on the Web because people's eyes are only moving to the spaces they're
interested in, and they don't have any reason to look at spaces that they're not interested in.
In the past, people thought all they needed to do was to build links to other sites and drive traffic. But they realized it's not being effective because people are now focusing on relatively
few bookmarks and going back to the same places time and time again.
Where does television fit into all of this?
Television is an interrupted medium. It requires you to pay attention to messages that go by, so it's very good for brand building. The Internet is a navigation system, so you just go
where you want and ignore things you're not familiar with. It's very bad for brand building; it's very good for executing.
So if Internet companies are placing ads in newspapers , magazines and television to pull people onto the Net, wouldn't that undermine these traditional media?
We thought there would be a displacement of reading time from print to the Web site. [But] what we found is that just the opposite occurs. As people spend more time on your Web
site, they spend more time reading your publication.
We asked them why that is, and they say: "I'm very interested in being able to participate in your community, your chats, your forums, and learn more about buying opportunities -- so
your publication is an excellent briefer. It keeps me up to date with what's happening, it gives me the trends, the commentary, and then I can discuss better in the Web site and I can
make better decisions."
So the two go up together, rather than being displacing. And then we asked them from where they are taking the time for more Web using. In business, they always say they're taking it
from the telephones. They used the telephone for discussion and buying, but now use the Web. And if they're at home, they say they're taking it from television, that they find they can
get a more self-controlled entertainment and information experience than they can on television.
If traditional media are proving more effective for advertising, where does this leave the trend in advertising over the Web?
I think there will be a major shift in paying for exposure on the Web. People are finding it's not a good brand-building [medium], so they're increasingly wanting only to pay for the results
they obtain.
For the Web site owner, we find that most people are finding statistically predictable patterns -- if you have 1,000 visitors, 2 per cent of them will click on a certain type of ad. Of those,
maybe one-half per cent will actually buy the product being offered.
So you can say, "I'm charging $50 for the 1,000 impressions that you get," or, if we're talking clickthroughs, "You're going to get 20 clickthroughs, and I'm going to charge you $2.50 a
clickthrough." Or, if you're going to get orders, "You're going to get five orders, I'm going to charge you $10 an order."
Now, the same $50 comes out of that traffic, but the advertiser would much prefer $10 an order because it directly relates to what's being sold.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvbp01p2k

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

68/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Growing pains for Net
The Toronto Star
1045 words
2 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
The great assimilation of the Internet continues apace.
Once upon a time, the Net operated in some sort of magical bubble, apart from the mainstream of society.
Cops didn't know much about it. Scammers and less reputable business types preyed on newbies. Virtual vigilantes sought to stop them through things like e-mail bombing and other
technical tricks. Kids had no protection. Everyone made vast sweeping statements about e-commerce as a virtual "yellow brick road." The courts had almost no predecents to draw
from in groundbreaking decisions about online property.
More changes are still to come, but it's all shaking out. The Internet is developing a very discernable shape. The events like those below, and those to come over the next year or
two, will stay with us for years. The Net's "formative years" if you will.
SNEAKY MONITORING: UNCOVERED At a time when there is a growing public distrust of the intrusive corporate collection of data in our private lives, RealNetworks decides to
surreptitiously snoop on what the users of its software are doing when online .
RealNetworks makes multimedia software, best known for RealAudio. RealAudio was collecting up details on user listening preferences and sending them back to RealNetworks.
What bonehead came up with this idea? I sure wish I'd been at that product development meeting: "Hey, I have a great idea. Let's monitor everything our customers do, build a big
database, use that information as a profit centre . . . and never tell anyone! It'll be our little secret."
It's hard to believe an Internet company could believe anything can be kept hushed up online for long.
Not surprisingly, RealNetworks is now being sued in three different instances. Each case wants "class action status" - which means damages in the many millions, on behalf of all
users.
With each revelation of privacy abuse like this, the U.S. government is forced one step closer to the day when it will finally throw its hands up and say, "That's it! You Internet
companies cannot self-regulate. So we're going to have to do it for you."
And once they decide to regulate . . . who knows what they will do. To wit:
THE KIDS ARE ALL RIGHT It was recently announced that, as of April 21, 2000, commercial Web sites must have parental permission before they can collect data on kids (under 13)
for reselling.
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission defines permission as a direct phone call, fax, letter or e-mail (the latter verified through use of a password or personal information number).
You think that's going to slow down the data mining on kids? You bet. It's going to take a lot of enticing to get parents to give such formal permission.
If the Web site is only going to compile the data for itself, a non-password protected e-mail will suffice.
The FTC got involved in the matter when a study discovered that 89 per cent of big commercial kids sites routinely collected personal data - name, address and what they'd like to buy while a mere 1 per cent sought parental permission.
ONLINE FRAUD The California man who posted fake lots for auction on eBay was recently sentenced to 14 months in prison. Real, not virtual, jail time. Robert J. Guest, 31, took
customers for over $37,000 U.S., pretending he had the Sony digital cameras and IBM laptops he advertised. He cashed the cheques and money orders and thought he could just
ignore the matter, undoubtedly because it's the Web and everyone "is anonymous." Surprise.
WAR ONLINE : The Pentagon has opened a cyberwar command in Colorado Springs. The free-wheeling days are gone. You don't know who you are bumping into out there. The
Pentagon said it attacked Serbian computer networks during the air strikes against Kosovo.
REALISTIC ABOUT RETAIL It's Christmas. The usual polyanna predictions about e-ommerce are being carted out by "objective" research companies like Forrester and Jupiter. Ecommerce is here to stay, we all know it, so put away the megaphone.
But it's not necessarily wonderful everywhere. Business failures are still rampant online - just like offline! Levi Strauss surprised everyone and announced it was killing independent etail ventures www .levi.com [http://www.levi.com/] and www .docker.com [http://www.docker.com/] right after the holiday season. Instead, all that will be funneled through mega-retailer
sites like J.C. Penny.
The jeans people says they can't pay for it. A spokesperson was quoted on CNN: "We've learned a lot over the last year. We've learned about effectively marketing our products
online . We also learned that the cost of running a world-class e-commerce business is unaffordable for us right now."
NET STOCKS: But one area that still operates outside reality is the publicly traded Internet company. These stocks are so over-valued, something's eventually got to give.
Since Netscape went public back in 1995, 133 other Internet companies have launched initial public offerings (IPOs). Many have soared in stock price - ignoring traditional methods
for determining stock price valuation.
The founding editors of Red Herring magazine have a new book out called "The Internet Bubble." They predict a crash for that sector in the near future . They calculate that those
133 companies are collectively over-valued by $230 billion U.S.
And when the "correction" finally happens, they predict most holders of these stocks will by hit by a 50 per cent meltdown - if not more.
Of the 133 companies, only 22 are making profit at all right now.
And revenues are probably over-stated because Net companies include "barter" Web banner advertising. That's where one site swaps ads with another site, and books the transaction.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

69/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

There's nothing technically illegal about it. But it can distort investor impressions. For instance, the Sportsline Web site says it had $24 million in revenue. But it turns out that a fifth of
that was cashless barter trading of ads.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
xxxxx xxxxxxxx: xxx xxxxxxxx Web sites like CitySearch will be the successfule-commerce model of the .
Document tor0000020010830dvc2016ik

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

70/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Gates confident `Web lifestyle' will catch on --- Acknowledges computers must work better to win people over
Timothy C. Barmann
916 words
3 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

CAMBRIDGE, Mass. - Despite dramatic advances in technology and software over the past few years, Bill Gates says few of us are really living what he calls the "Web lifestyle."
Even though lots of people use the Web, say to drop an E-mail message to a relative, only about 5 per cent of the people in North America have truly integrated the Internet into their
daily lives, Gates said. The 5 per cent used the Web daily to read news , make travel arrangements and contact friends.
"Despite the hype, the numbers about personal computing and the Internet , we're going to look back on how we're doing things today and think of it as very primitive, even in 10 years
time," Gates said.
Gates, Microsoft's co-founder and top executive, spoke last month at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to mark the 35th anniversary of the school's Laboratory for Computer
Science. The event was broadcast live over the Internet .
The school used the occasion to announce that Gates and his wife, Melinda, have donated $20 million (U.S.) to build a new building on campus for the laboratory, which will be named
after Gates. It's expected to be completed by 2003.
Besides Gates, the scheduled speakers were some of the most influential figures in the computer industry, many of whom have a connection to MIT. They included Bob Metcalfe, who
invented ethernet, the technology commonly used to connect computers in a local network; and Tim Berners-Lee, who is credited with inventing the World Wide Web .
Gates has also made major donations to other educational institutions, including Harvard University, which he attended for two years before dropping out; and to Stanford University.
Gates is considered to be the richest man in the world, owning about 501 million shares of Microsoft stock, which is worth about $45 billion (U.S.).
Midway through his otherwise serious speech, Gates showed a hilarious video that poked fun at the general lack of knowledge about technology, about Wall Street's high
expectations of Internet companies and even his own nerdiness. It starred comedian Jay Leno, NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw, film director George Lucas, Microsoft president
Steven Ballmer and Gates.
`Within the next five years . . . people will read even a magazine, a thesis, a long document off of an LCD screen' Gates talked about the future of software and computers and
discussed themes and ideas similar to those he has written about in his books. He called the Internet "the most revolutionary communications device of all time."
He talked about the impending conversion to a digital world where we will get our music and books over the Internet , instead of buying CDs and bound paper.
Before long we'll see a "substitution effect" where the digital form - perhaps a trade journal's Web site - will replace the physical form of the journal itself.
Some advances are needed in software and screen technology before that will happen.
"Within the next five years, those advances will actually make it so that people will read even a magazine, a thesis, a long document off of an LCD screen," he said. (LCD refers to
liquid crystal display, the technology behind screens on laptop computers and smaller computer devices.)
We won't think of computers in the traditional sense, he said. They will be defined by how large the screens are and whether they are connected to the Internet by wire or radio
transmission.
"Anything that sends an image to the retina - part of glasses, a wrist watch, a pocket-size device - everyone of those will be a choice.
"All of these devices will have browsers built in, all of them will be connected to the Internet ," he said.
Artificial intelligence and computer learning remain some of the most difficult problems that researchers face. Despite the great minds that have been tackling these problems for more
than three decades, Gates said, only limited progress has been made. Chess programs, for example, use brute force - calculating the results of random moves - to determine what the
best move is, rather than learning.
In the next decade, Gates said, we will find "substantial solutions" to mimicking the senses - vision, speech recognition and navigation. People will create "small robots that actually
have some utility because they can see and move around and do things that are very helpful."
Gates said much work needs to be done in making software simpler and more reliable.
"We have made some progress, but people's expectation of software, the scale of the system, the level of reliability that they want out of these systems, still greatly exceeds what's
possible."
Gates didn't bring up the pending antitrust lawsuit brought by the U.S. federal government and 19 states against his company. At a news briefing after the speech, he offered a familiar
response.
"We think supporting the Internet and Windows - that's a very, very good thing and we think having the integrity of Windows as a complete product is a very good thing. We just want
to have the freedom to innovate and continue to have a product with great integrity."
SHOWMAN: Bill Gates stands in silhouette while looking at his laptop PC as a screen above shows him and Microsoft president Steve Balmer spoofing a VW ad.
Document tor0000020010830dv5300c7z

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

71/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

CONTEXT

Signs of change, fear of repression --- Iran is being swept by surprising forces for change, but every once in a while, the
hardliners strike back
Sandro Contenta
2230 words
31 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

`The concern is that they'll try to create turmoil to such an extent that Ayotollah Khamenei will come out and say, "Everything is so dangerous and chaotic that we must postpone the
elections" '
Ebrahim Yazdi,
Reform leader
TEHRAN
AT THE "martyrs' cemetery" on the outskirts of Iran's capital, the rows of tightly packed tombs stretch out as far as the eye can see.
Banners everywhere bless the souls of hundreds of thousands of young men. Pictures above their tombs show some of them lifeless on the bloody battlefield of the Iran-Iraq war.
It's an empty place on a weekday afternoon, except for the odd mourner such as Moharam Fallah, who is crouched over his son's grave, sweeping the marble cover of his tomb with a
towel.
"He was at the front six months; all they brought back to me was the bottom half of his body," says Fallah, showing a reporter a prayer book he had made with pictures of his 32-yearold son, Ali.
At 75 years old, Fallah's life is firmly rooted in the past. The way he calls his son's death "an honour" because it helped safeguard the Islamic revolution ; the way he recites slogans of
total submission to Islam; his invectives against U.S. imperialism; and his memories of brutality under the deposed Shah of Iran - all speak of a man at peace with the last 20 years of
Iran's history.
But in Iran's political power struggle, Fallah looks to the future .
Between the right-wing clerics who charted the revolution he cherishes and a new group demanding democratic reforms, Fallah chooses change .
"My whole family will vote for Mr. Khatami's people," Fallah says, referring to the reformist candidates of President Mohammad Khatami, who will try to overturn the right wing's control
of parliament in February's election.
Iran has come a long way since its 1979 religious revolution , when ayatollahs smiled upon the students who held 55 Americans hostage for 444 days and swept Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini to power.
Khatami's movement to reform Iran - by ending its international isolation, implementing greater freedoms and setting up a civic society that ensures the rule of law - is proving
irresistible for many Iranians, even some unlikely ones.
Ayatollah Sadegh, for example, the head of the judiciary who gained notoriety by sending hundreds of dissidents to their deaths in the early months of the revolution , now publicly
supports Khatami.
So do students such as those who led the hostage-taking at the U.S. embassy 20 years ago, a drama that allowed hardline clerics to push moderates out of office and consolidate their
power.
Khatami's surprise electoral victory two years ago spawned a vibrant political culture that belies the Western view of Iran, where black chadors are the symbol of smothered freedom.
Signs of change are everywhere: Some clerics are questioning the theocratic nature of the Islamic republic, reformist newspapers are commanding huge circulations, Khatami is
making his first visits to European capitals, Internet cafes are sprouting, and Iranians are openly expressing their desire to shake off 20 years of hardline rule.
Still, there's no guarantee that reformers will come out on top in February's vote.
The dozen or so groups on the right hope to boost their electoral chances by trying to unite under one electoral banner. And they still enjoy support in rural areas, where many vote the
way mullahs tell them to during Friday prayers.
Every day, the political pendulum of more freedoms vs. hardline crackdowns swings back and forth. Students who led a peaceful, pro-democracy protest last summer get arrested one
day, and the police chief who oversaw a bloody crackdown of the demonstrations resigns the next.
"At the moment, democracy in Iran is like a minefield, and no one has the map of where the mines are buried," says Mashalla Shamsolvaezin, a reformist newspaper editor facing a
jail sentence.
Supreme power remains in the hands of a cleric, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Hardliners still control the judiciary, the security forces, and a majority in the 270-seat Majlis or parliament. And
factions within these bodies aren't giving up without a fight.
"The concern is that they'll try to create turmoil to such an extent that Ayotollah Khamenei will come out and say, `Everything is so dangerous and chaotic that we must postpone the
elections,' " says Ebrahim Yazdi, a leader of one of the reform groups.
Some of the trouble began a year ago, when a death squad linked to the ministry of intelligence killed five leading intellectuals.
More recent events have led to the ongoing trial of two students, who face the death penalty for writing a satirical play about Islam that was published in 150 copies of a student
newspaper . Observers say it's a bid to portray Khatami's movement as fanning blasphemy against Islam.
Reformist newspapers are routinely shut down and editors jailed. The latest target is Abdollah Nouri, a Khatami ally charged with defaming the late revolutionary leader Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini, and backing renewed ties with the U.S.
Nouri, forced out as interior minister by hardline MPs last year, will be barred from running as a parliamentary candidate if convicted.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

72/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

But even if acquitted, Nouri will have to be approved by the conservative-dominated Council of Guardians, which has the final say on who can run for parliament. Reformers fear the
council is poised to disqualify many of their high-profile candidates.
While those at the top jostle over political paths, many at the bottom know precisely the direction they hope will be charted.
At Tehran's teeming bazaar, a stairway in the heart of the labyrinth of shops leads to a small tea room below the din. Two big samovars keep the tea - and the room - hot.
"The people of Iran are good. It's the regime that's bad," says Ebrahim, 61, a high school teacher of Persian literature, who complained about a salary of less than $100 a month.
"Don't they know what it costs to pay rent? They don't value human beings," he says.
Ebrahim wouldn't give his last name - "I don't plan to be visiting a prison any time soon" - and he stopped talking the second two young men walked in, sporting the closely cropped
beard that is the dress code of hardline militia groups.
Another patron, Hussein, was eager to continue the conversation and invited a reporter to his shop of pots and pans. There, he rounded up his boss, Ali, and co-worker, Said. They're
all single, and none finished high school.
"Can you believe this guy? He was asking questions in the tea room, like he was going to get straight answers," Hussein tells his friends.
"First of all, you have to know that we all support Khatami. The words of the other side have lost their meaning," says Hussein, 29.
"Don't say so much," says Ali, 36.
"You're one of the people who supported the revolution ," Hussein shoots back. "If you had the brains you have now, would you have supported it back then?"
"No," Ali replies. "The revolution we wanted isn't the revolution we got. We felt the revolution would take us forward, but it took us back 300 years."
"They pay more attention to Arab culture than our own. That's what makes my blood boil," Hussein says, alluding to the rigid and widespread imposition of Islam. "We're not Arabs,
we're Persians.
"Religion is fine but everything has its place," he adds. "Did you know they're going to teach the Koran in the first grade? While Japanese kids do calculations, our kids are reading the
Koran. They don't want Iran to progress."
Said suddenly pipes in: "Islamists shouldn't be involved in the law of the land. These guys have mixed everything up. We have to separate religion from the government."
"The problem now is that everybody has their own law. They wake up in the morning and they make one up," Hussein says.
"We're like everybody else. We want to be able to think we have a future ," Ali says
"And we want the world to stop thinking we're terrorists," Hussein adds.
Demographics creates the biggest pressure for change . An estimated 75 per cent of the 65 million Iranians are under 35. For most of them, the revolution is barely a memory. Their
world is that of satellite dishes - officially banned but widely used - the Internet and a stagnant economy.
They are children of the revolution 's successes. Free education reduced the massive illiteracy rate that existed under the Shah to just 15 per cent.
Women, despite the Western image of stifling chadors, make up half of the students at university. They're demanding changes to discriminatory laws, such as those that give exhusbands the custody of children in a divorce.
"Any woman who has gone through university will not be easily oppressed," says human rights lawyer Shirin Ebadi.
Every year, another 1 million young people, many of them highly educated, hit the job market. To meet the demand, analysts say Iran must modernize its resource-based economy and
open up to the global market.
In the meantime, a bleak economic future foments resentment against the Islamic republic and fans nationalist sentiment.
Hussein's complaint - "We're not Arabs" - is a refrain heard throughout Tehran. It's perhaps the most stinging indictment of the revolution : It tells religious leaders that the way they
ruled the country for 20 years made them strangers in their own land.
The rigid enforcement of Islamic laws from the Koran may be all right for Saudi Arabia, Iranians say, but it's out of sync with Iran's Persian heritage, shaped by both Islamic and
Western influences.
Iranians speak respectfully of Islam. But a growing number are saying that religion belongs in homes and mosques, not government. That kind of talk still gets you thrown in jail.
The most high-profile victim is Grand Ayatollah Hosseyn Ali Montazeri, once touted as the successor to the late Khomeini as Iran's spiritual and political leader.
Montazeri, 77, has been under house arrest for the past 18 months after questioning the theocratic nature of the Shi'ite Islamic republic, and the skills of the ayatollah heading it.
He called for a change in the constitutionally enshrined concept of velayat-e faqih, which places Western-style political institutions under the influence of a supreme Islamic jurist - a
position now held by Khomeini's successor, Khamenei.
The post should essentially be a spiritual one, Montazeri said, rather than one that now controls key levers of power.
Khatami, a middle-level cleric, does not call for the separation of religion and state. Some of his supporters say his reforms are the republic's only chance of saving its Islamic character.
Others say they're a step to ridding the state of religion altogether.
For the youths who stroll the trails on the mountains that form Tehran's northern border, Islam's political demise can't come soon enough.
Stylish white scarfs partly cover the heads of young women; their unbuttoned robes reveal jeans and tight T-shirts. It's a conscious defiance that keeps them alert.
"We're always careful about the Basij," says one of their male friends, Mehrdad, a graphic arts student at the University of Tehran, referring to the militia group that enforces the Islamic
morals of the revolution . (Romance between unmarried men and women is still illegal.)
"A few months ago, they beat me up because I was wearing jeans," says Mehrdad, 20, sitting with a group of six friends.
"The younger generation doesn't want an Islamic society any more, but they're forcing it on us," says Hassan 24, an engineer.
"We don't want Arab culture or clerical culture; we want Iranian culture," says Shahpari, a 25-year-old photographer. "Just because we accept the religion that comes from Arabs
doesn't mean we want their culture."
Asked what kind of Arab culture is being forced on her, Shahpari points to the loudspeakers echoing afternoon prayers throughout the mountain.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

73/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

"That's what I mean. It's our religion, but everyone should be listening to it in the privacy of their homes," she says.
They fully supported Khatami, but Mehrdad sees a bleak future if the reformers wrestle power from the right-wing in February's parliamentary vote.
"After the elections, if the right loses power, some of them will be willing to walk on many dead bodies to try and stop the change ," he says.
AGAINST : An anti-reform protester shouts slogans at a rally last July outside Tehran University. The event countered six days of pro-reform demonstrations. MET WITH VIOLENCE: A student with face
covered helps a friend who was tear-gassed by police at July pro-reform rally in Tehran. CAUGHT IN TURMOIL: Reformist editor Mashalla Shamsolvaezin, top, faces a jail sentence. Moharam Fallah
backs regime despite his son's death in war with Iraq.
Document tor0000020010830dvav012c8

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

74/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Sold on the Web Multilevel marketers such as Amway are using the mysterious allure of technology to sign up a new
generation of recruits.
TYLER HAMILTON
2172 words
11 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Markham, Ont. -- Phil Davies shakes hands as he strolls to the front of a curious crowd that has gathered at the Embassy Suites hotel just north of Toronto.
Mr. Davies, a thin man with nicely coiffed hair and a crisp navy suit, jumps into a well-practised presentation meant to motivate and excite his audience about an amazing business
opportunity.
The hook comes about a third of the way through his routine.
" Internet . E-commerce. Cybermall." He punches out the words, as if each one held the key to a better life. "We know that E-commerce is the way to go," he continues, holding up a
copy of Fortune magazine emblazoned with the latest trendy E-term. "All you have to do is plug people into the Internet and you'll get paid for it. . . . Even Martha Stewart is going online."
Mr. Davies, a 41-year-old former fashion model who used to run an aluminum sales company, could easily be an enthusiastic Web site designer or a headhunter for a large technology
firm. But beyond the three buzzwords -- Internet , E-commerce, cybermall -- he divulges little information in his speech.
Eventually, the important details begin to surface.
After more than an hour of patient listening, the young, fidgety audience of about 150 discovers that Mr. Davies is a senior distributor and recruiter for multilevel marketing company
Amway Corp. Clearly disappointed, most of the room clears during a 10-minute break.
"Sounds like a pyramid scheme to me," says one twentysomething who decides he's wasted his time.
Still, the buzzwords lured him to the meeting, and showing up is the first step to becoming a new recruit in the multilevel marketing operation.
Multilevel marketing is often equated -- mistakenly -- with illegal pyramid schemes, in which participants make money solely by signing up new members.
Multilevel marketers survive by recruiting a large stable of independent sales representatives who, like most salespeople, earn a commission for the products they sell.
Unlike most salespeople, however, these reps also make money from new members. They get a percentage of the revenue that their own recruits generate -- and so on, in a top-down
structure that resembles a pyramid. Start early enough in the process and have the persistence to stay in the game, and the rewards grow exponentially.
Amway is hoping the lure of the Internet will get more people into the game.
The company announced last week that on Sept. 1 it will launch Quixtar.com, taking its 40-year-old sales model to the impersonal world of the Internet . Meetings such as this one in
Toronto are being held across North America to drum up excitement among existing and potential sales reps.
The mere mention of " Internet " and "E-commerce" is painting a gloss on an old-fashioned and, in some minds, tarnished way of selling products. For the uninitiated, technology
carries a mystique that can turn skeptics into believers, more likely to take a leap of faith into ventures that appear too good to be true. For the techno-savvy, talk of E-commerce spurs
curiosity and is capable of luring a new generation of recruits.
Whether such technologies are a vehicle for sales or the thing being sold, the fact remains that the Internet , E-commerce and anything touched by high-tech hype is breathing new life
into multilevel marketing -- and muffling the warnings of naysayers.
"The whole idea of 'Oh shoot, I've got to have a Web site and go on the Internet ' is going through the minds of every businessman in North America," says Alan Middleton, professor of
marketing at York University's Schulich School of Business in Toronto.
E-commerce fills the headlines of newspapers and magazines. Many still don't know what it is and how it affects their life, but they know the technology is important. They want in,
and companies such as Amway -- which, through Quixtar.com, gives new recruits a Web-based business for selling Amway products -- are opening the door.
Amway also seems to be targeting younger recruits from large cities, Mr. Middleton says, a move that stands in bright contrast to the older, rural markets in which it has traditionally
operated.
He says the urban crowd is wary of such organizations, but E-commerce provides a relatively hip way of participating in the multilevel marketing game. "These are the groups that
might be a little embarrassed by banging on a friend's door."
Wooing new recruits
By Amway's own admission, the big money is hard to come by. According to an Amway of Canada business plan for new recruits, "the average monthly compensation for a participant
in the Amway sales and marketing plan was $61," for anybody who had the determination to stay with the organization for a full year.
But many who join simply can't make it through a year. While the idea is to sell and recruit through face-to-face contact among a community of family and friends, the inadvertent sideeffect of multilevel marketing -- often called "relationship" marketing -- is that casual get-togethers for coffee and conversation turn into backdoor sales pitches. Relatives feel duped.
Friendships often become strained. In the end, many sales reps are simply not aggressive enough and soon crumble under the pressure.
Moving to the Internet resolves some of these problems. "One of the things they push at these meetings is the idea of personal contract," says Patrick Hee, an E-commerce analyst
with Mountain View, Calif.-based research firm Frost & Sullivan. "Moving to the Web disassociates them from that. By not having the strong contact, there's not as much pressure for
the person."
A sales rep need merely hand out a business card with a Web site address and ask a person to check it out at their convenience. Control stays in the hands of the friend or relative, and
an imposition is avoided.
In the case of Amway, the company said its name won't even be mentioned on the Web site, a move that would suggest the Amway brand has in some camps become more of a
setback than an opportunity.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

75/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Eighteen-year-old Tomas Hirmer had no idea that Amway was behind an exciting-sounding technology venture that a friend convinced him to check out. A first-year computer
engineering student living in residence at the University of Toronto, Mr. Hirmer and seven other residents were rounded up in their common room one Saturday and told of an
opportunity that had something to do with E-commerce.
"We were under the impression that he was looking for people that were interested in developing a Web site or something related to computers," says Mr. Hirmer, who decided to
attend a meeting to get more details.
"Partially through this meeting it became clear these people were more interested in signing us up to sell Amway products, and they were very sketchy on the details about Ecommerce and Internet Web sites."
Still, believing there was something interesting around the next corner, Mr. Hirmer spent $230 on an Amway kit -- which had no mention of electronic commerce -- and attended a
couple of meetings. Eventually, he concluded that the technology angle was little more than an enticement for new recruits.
"That first night, we had all kinds of questions. But the guy wouldn't answer any of our questions," he says. "These people didn't seem to be all that up front with me."
Two weeks ago, he mailed his kit back to Amway and got his money back, less the cost of shipping the package to Amway of Canada's headquarters in London, Ont.
Companies such as Amway are not doing anything wrong, says Ken Wong, associate professor of marketing and business strategy at Queen's University in Kingston, Ont.
Nonetheless, Mr. Wong calls such operations "deceptive" because they feed off the innocent and the naive.
"The challenge you face if you're an Amway or someone else is that at some point, you run out of recruits . . . you start to exhaust the market," says Mr. Wong, explaining that pyramidlike schemes by nature begin to collapse once a market is saturated.
Ken MacDonald, regional vice-president for Amway North America, says it's been a tough year for the company, but adds that the North American business remains strong and that the
Quixtar.com venture -- exclusive to the region -- will be a perfect complement to the traditional business.
The site is being launched just as several trends converge, including cheaper computers, higher-speed access to the World Wide Web and media hype about the Internet , Mr.
MacDonald says.
Mr. Wong, meanwhile, says it's clear that Amway's on-line venture is designed to open up a whole new market of potential recruits that would never go near the door-to-door concept.
"The fact that you have the Internet out there, there's always going to be people trying to take advantage of it.
"People are lured by the seeming magic and ease of making money through E-commerce [and] a chance to be on the leading edge of technology."
High tech for sale
Use of the Internet to sell products, or recruit sales reps however, isn't the only way technology is making its way into multilevel marketing. Increasingly, technological goods and
services such as computers, long-distance telephone plans and Internet access packages are taking the spotlight from more mundane items such as soap, household cleaners, pots
and vitamins.
Big Planet Inc., a division of personal care product giant Nu Skin Enterprises Inc. of Provo, Utah, was formed last April to sell telecommunications, cable and Internet services through
the tried and true methods of multilevel marketing.
Excel Communications Inc. of Dallas used relationship marketing to become the fifth-largest U.S. long-distance company, employing more than 300,000 part-time sales reps who
generated about $1.5-billion in revenue in 1997. That strategy is now being nurtured here through Excel Canada, created after Excel's merger last year with Montreal-based Teleglobe
Inc.
Amway has a few high-tech goodies up its sleeve as well. In Canada, the company sells AT&T Canada long-distance services and wireless phone packages from Rogers Cantel Mobile
Communications Inc.
Then there's Valencia, Calif.-based FutureNet Online Inc., which positioned itself as a multilevel marketer but was charged last February by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) for running an illegal pyramid scheme.
FutureNet , which has since settled with the commission, was telling its recruits they could make loads of cash selling Internet access equipment, such as WebTV devices and
network computers. These recruits took on the sexy title of " Internet consultant" after they paid fees of up to $750. Problem was, the money these consultants were promised came
primarily from drumming up new recruits, not from selling the devices. For this reason, the operation fell under the definition of a pyramid scheme and the company was asked to adjust
its business plans.
FutureNet had a division based in Vancouver called FutureNet Online Marketing Canada Inc., but the company was out of business within months of its November, 1997, launch
after the two firms supplying the bulk of its products pulled out.
That left hundreds of Canadian " Internet consultants" out in the cold, having paid distributor fees and spent months lining up new recruits.
Says a voice message from FutureNet 's director of legal affairs: " FutureNet Online Inc., the American company, is not responsible for any losses suffered by Canadian distributors . .
. no one is happy with the situation, but it is what it is."
'REMEMBER THE CIRCLE RULE'
A script given to " Internet consultants" who join FutureNet Inc.'s multilevel marketing program says to remember the three-foot Circle Rule: "You should be continually talking to
people -- anyone within three feet of you!"
Sample script: (If you meet someone on a plane, near the end of a flight)
Consultant: "Are you getting off at Vancouver too?"
Prospect: "Yes."
Consultant: "Are you travelling for business or pleasure?"
Prospect: "I'm attending a seminar. What about you?"
Consultant: "I'm on business. I've just expanded into the Vancouver area and they've asked me to come in and provide some additional training. I'm really excited about this trip. My
business has taken off!"
Prospect: "What business are you in?"
Consultant: "I'm in technology. I bring high-tech products to people who consider themselves low tech."
Prospect: "What kind of products are they?"

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

76/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Consultant: "Our company retails a high-tech product that takes such common items as your TV and your telephone and brings you access in your home to the Internet and E-mail!"
Prospect: "Wow. Sounds really interesting. Do you have some literature I can read about this?"
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv3b00cu9

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

77/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology Careers

Journalist retools her career Tessa Sproule tells stories on-line after studying technical skills in new media course
KEVIN MARRON
992 words
17 June 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T10
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Radio journalist Tessa Sproule wanted to give her stories a broader scope.
Thanks to a course that has taught her to use the tools of the World Wide Web , she has found a way of just doing that -- as well as a new direction for her career.
The 25-year-old gave up her job on a CBC radio arts program two years ago to enroll in MediaLinx h@bitat, a program at the Toronto-based Canadian Film Centre that provides
training in new media design.
"It opened my mind to a wide-open world of possibilities," says Ms. Sproule, who is now a senior on-line producer and editor at Infoculture, a CBC Web site devoted to the arts.
Ana Serrano, the director of MediaLinx h@bitat, says there are plenty of career opportunities in new media. The demand is not just for technical specialists or people with a flair for
creative design, but for people who have learned to use the tools to communicate well.
"We're trying to teach people how to understand the technology and develop the same kind of relationship that a carpenter may have with his or her hammer," she says. The fourmonth residential course limits its enrolment to 12 people who each pay a fee of $4,500.
With the help of nine full-time faculty members and more than 30 guest lectures, Ms. Sproule and her fellow students began by examining a series of case studies.
For example, students looked at how the movie Blade Runner was transformed from a short story to a movie, and later to a video game. In another case study, students looked at how
American public broadcaster PBS uses its Web site to complement programs aired on television.
After the case studies, the students did collaborative work.
The Great Canadian Story Engine is the project that Ms. Sproule and her group developed in school -- and continue to work on as graduates. The plan is to gather stories, memoirs
and recollections from people all over the country and put the material in a database.
The information would be accessible through a Web site, which would become an on-line repository where people can share personal experiences in a number of formats, including
letters, photographs and digitized home movies.
Currently, the Great Canadian Story Engine currently exists only as a prototype on a compact disc. The Web site will not be up and running until funding and partnership arrangements
are completed -- though the project has been awarded a $500,000 grant by the Millennium Bureau of Canada.
Ms. Sproule's project required that she learn some programming skills and she became adept at using graphics software. Other students focused on different skills, depending on their
backgrounds.
For example, another student working on the story engine had a background in computers but not journalism , and learned to use video-editing software.
What was most important, Ms. Proule says, was that she "learned how to learn" such tools as graphics software, a valuable skill since the world of new media is continually changing.
Ms. Sproule discovered h@bitat when she was assigned to do a story on it for the CBC Arts Report two years ago. At that time, she says, she was feeling constrained by the limitations
of radio and worried about her career prospects in the light of CBC cutbacks.
When she saw what people were doing at the film centre program, she says, "I thought, 'Why wouldn't I want to do this?' So I packed up shop and said, 'I'm going back to school.'
"The people at h@bitat make you feel like you're dealing with a blank slate and its all yours to write on, paint on, or whatever you want to do with it."
The emphasis of the program, she says, was on "how to learn what you need to learn in order to get things done."
As someone with very little technical knowledge, Ms. Sproule learned from other students in her group about the possibilities and limitations of the Internet and multimedia. "I was
approaching it more from a storytelling aspect, but the technical people were saying, 'It's great and fine to have these stories link up together but how do you actually do that and what
navigation tools do you use?' "
At the same time, Ms. Serrano observes that there are lots of people with good technical expertise, but its the content creators who will eventually shape the industry.
"There are many schools that do research and development in the technical area, but few that look at questions like how to make someone smile with the click of a mouse . . . or how to
create emotional engagement through this medium," Ms. Serrano adds.
Ms. Sproule says the program opened her eyes to the possibilities of new media in journalism . Graduating from the course also got her an interview for her current job.
"I didn't have any work experience in [new media] but the school was enough to get me in the door.
"Part of the problem with new media is that the job postings all say they want three years' experience. But that's ridiculous, because not many people have been working in the industry
for that long. And do you want someone who's been there from the beginning or do you want fresh ideas?"
Ms. Sproule says she now views her prospects as "totally open-ended." She expects to remain in journalism , though the media may change beyond recognition.
But whatever new technologies the future may bring, she says she is confident that she can use whatever comes to hand to tell her story.
Site seeing
www .cdnfilmcentre.com [http://www.cdnfilmcentre.com/]. www .infoculture.cbc.ca [http://www.infoculture.cbc.ca/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv6h00vrz

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

78/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

HOT LINKS
Report on Business: Technology

CTV's trial by error Site seeing
MARK EVANS
715 words
22 April 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Just when Canada finally seems to be grasping the Internet 's importance, something bizarre happens that causes you to wring your hands in frustration.
There was another puzzling development when CTV Inc., the country's largest private broadcaster, last week unveiled a new Web site, ctvnews.sympatico.ca, with MediaLinx
Interactive LP's Sympatico unit.
CTV appeared to be taking a step in the right direction, with a site that features full-motion video of its CTV News 1 headline news network and some other nifty aspects. But the
company tempered the move by cautioning that the new and improved site was a three-month "technical trial."
While CTV didn't offer a definition of what would make for a successful trial, the notion that it may scrap the whole idea if there isn't enough short-term interest indicates that CTV
management has yet to really buy into the Internet . Either that, or it doesn't have the financial patience for an on-line venture that may take years to make a profit.
Now if you've ever visited CTV's older Web site, which can still found at www .ctv.ca [http://www.ctv.ca/], it offers a pretty good idea of the broadcaster's conservative approach to an
industry that changes every day. The site is basic, boring and there's nothing compelling other than a photograph of Ally McBeal star Calista Flockhart.
The sad reality is that Canadian broadcasters have been overly cautious about the Internet , trying to determine its importance, while other media organization such as Torstar Corp.
and Thomson Corp. are moving quickly to capitalize on new opportunities.
For example, CanWest Broadcasting Corp., which operates the Global Television Network in Canada, didn't have a World Wide Web site until December and the focus is mostly
investor relations and corporate information.
Among Canadian television broadcasters, the only one that can be given full marks is the Canadian Broadcasting Corp., which is spending about $20-million a year on its Web site.
With extensive video and audio, an attractive design and the full support of management, the cash-strapped public broadcaster realizes the Internet is where the action is going to be.
Of course, CBC has the advantage of not having to answer to shareholders or the bottom line, allowing it to avoid pesky questions at annual meetings about why it's investing so
heavily in a project that generates little revenue and plenty of losses.
It shouldn't be forgotten that large investments to develop top-notch Web sites are a necessary evil. But that's a hard thing to swallow for traditional media companies such as television
broadcasters now grappling with competition from speciality stations, pay-per-view and the 500-channel world of satellites.
Canadian broadcasters could learn a lot from their peers in the United States -- much like advertisers up here could become more adventurous and aggressive by looking south of the
border.
One of the most aggressive U.S. broadcasters is CBS Corp., which has made investments in Web sites offering everything from financial news to sports information.
Last week, CBS expanded its presence on the Internet by buying 35 per cent of Hollywood Online Inc., whose site offers movie information, entertainment news and movie listings
at local theatres and on television. CBS also bought StoreRunner Inc., whose on-line shopping site lets visitors compare prices of different brands.
By capitalizing on its well-known name, CBS wants to extend its brand to the Internet whether people are looking for news , sports, entertainment or shopping sites. It's an ambitious
strategy and bound to produce successes and failures. The important issue, however, is that CBS is willing to take chances on-line -- a lesson that Canadian broadcasters should take
to heart.
The Internet moves so quickly that the tools traditionally used to assess the financial prospects of media companies can be thrown out the window. Whether you're a television
broadcaster, newspaper , radio station, the new media reality isn't on the horizon anymore -- and this is no time for "technical trials." Mark Evans can be reached at
mevans@globeandmail.ca
ctvnews.sympatico.ca www .ctv.ca [http://www.ctv.ca/] www .cbc.ca [http://www.cbc.ca/] www .canwestglobal.com [http://www.canwestglobal.com/]
Document glob000020010827dv4m00ktl

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

79/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

MEDIA
Saturday

Can this magazine be saved? It's a Canadian institution, but the weekly newsmagazine's place in today's 'instant' media is
dubious. The result: Internal conflict and a wobbly bottom line.
DOUG SAUNDERS and MICHAEL POSNER
1939 words
4 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
R9
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- -*** ROBERT LEWIS Some staff members say the magazine has to change , but the editor 'doesn't know how.' Lewis says he's sure Maclean's can set its own agenda and
affect national affairs. PAUL JONES The new publisher has a fix-it reputation, and a challenge: How to make Maclean's fresh and exciting without alienating its aging core readership,
who rely on its regurgitated news . GEOFF STEVENS The news -junkie managing editor may be one source of division. 'His bedside manner is nonexistent,' one critic complains. 'He
has an unfortunate way of dealing with people.'
-*** They were gathered after work at a favourite watering hole, Hughies, a dimly lit bar in the Maclean Hunter building on Toronto's College Street: A dozen writers and editors in
heated conversation about Maclean's, Canada's national newsmagazine, 95 years old next year.
At one point, the discussion turned nasty. A top-ranked business-magazine editor started saying the sorts of things about Maclean's, and its editor-in-chief, Robert Lewis, that only its
competitors used to. "We've been regurgitating the week's news for 20 years, and nobody's paying any attention any more. It's got to change , but he doesn't know how."
Ironically, seven floors above, a similar debate, albeit conducted in more sober and gentlemanly terms, was under way. In a corner office, Paul Jones, Maclean's magazine's new
publisher, sat huddled over a wealth of information he had commissioned: Reports from consumer focus groups in western and central Canada, circulation studies, advertising figures
and market-research surveys.
It was not simply a routine exercise; the future of the institution lies in the balance. By next month, Jones has vowed to tell his staff, and his corporate masters at Rogers
Communications, how he intends to reposition the magazine at the centre of Canada's fragmented media world, without alienating the half-million subscribers who have used the
magazine to catch up on current affairs each week of their adult lives.
For the second time in its history, Maclean's is facing a profound identity crisis. Peter C. Newman solved the problem 25 years ago by turning a contemplative monthly into a
newsweekly modelled after Time and Newsweek. Now, the newsmagazine genre itself is threatened, and the solution is not nearly so obvious.
"We're going through a very major process which every publication should do on a regular basis -- a self-examination," Jones said in an interview this week. "The question is, how far
can we go in a new direction vis-a-vis the expectations of very loyal readers."
Many journalists , both in and out of Maclean's, believe it must become an entirely different sort of publication. Specialty cable TV, the Internet and Canada's increasingly magazinelike daily newspapers have rendered the news digest irrelevant for many readers. At the newsweekly, this has led to confusion, aimlessness and factionalism.
"The problem facing Maclean's is the same one that faced the U.S. newsweeklies -- electronic communication has speeded everything up and there's a proliferation of daily and instant
media, so that everybody kind of has the feeling they already know everything, even if they don't," said John Macfarlane, editor-in-chief of Toronto Life magazine and a potential
successor to the Maclean's throne.
"At the same time, the big newspapers have become more analytical, doing more of the things newsmagazines used to do -- which leaves the newsweeklies with what?"
Jones and Lewis will spend the next few weeks answering that question. They will have to answer it to the satisfaction of Ted Rogers, the Maclean's newsroom, and major advertisers,
none of whom are content with the status quo.
Inside the magazine, there's a bitter division between news junkies who want to continue summarizing the week's big stories, and those who want the magazine to feature new trends
in lifestyle, health and pop culture. The great divide between rival camps was made vividly clear during what Maclean's staffers jokingly call the "Pokemon crisis." Even before the
cartoon-character trading cards became a bizarre schoolyard-crime phenomenon earlier this fall, some writers and editors lobbied to put Pokemon on the cover. Lewis and Stevens
resisted.
Weeks later, Time put Pokemon on its cover. Many at Maclean's felt they had missed the chance to be "ahead of the curve."
"It's not Watergate," a senior writer concedes, "but we could have looked good."
Failure to make the magazine a talking point is having an impact where it really counts: advertsing dollars. Six weeks ago, 200 Maclean's staff gathered in a conference room at
Toronto's Sutton Place Hotel to hear Jones read the riot act. Maclean's had lost major advertisers, he explained; most of the alcoholic-beverage industry, formerly a key revenue
source, "is gone and is not coming back." Two major car companies had also departed. Jones knew, but did not say that day, that the numbers were dismal: The magazine's advertising
revenues had taken a huge hit in 1999, down more than 22 per cent between January and October from the previous year. At posted ad rates, this would have represented a disastrous
loss of more than $5-million, at a publication whose revenues are perhaps $25-million. Even with ad discounts, analysts say the magazine would be running on 15 per cent less money
than last year.
Mind you, the picture has looked much brighter in recent months: The October university-survey issue was very strong, and the end-of-year issue is projected to be 270 pages, the
magazine's fattest ever. Still, there is a distinct sense that something dramatic will have to be done to keep more advertisers from leaving. A fellow executive said it's unlikely that Jones,
who transformed Canadian Business from a moribund business monthly into an exciting and timely fortnightly during his tenure as publisher there, will leave the magazine unchanged.
"We could decide that we're in exactly the right place," said Jones, though he concedes that this is not likely. "I have this prejudice: Maclean's is at its strongest when it is doing items
that define the agenda or set the news ." Rather than summarizing the week's headlines, he'd rather see Maclean's making them. "I don't know if our readers agree with that prejudice,"
he said, "and I'll have to find that out."
Jones might wonder the same of his staff. Editorially, the magazine is still trying to cope with a budget cut Rogers had imposed on all its periodicals in September. The Maclean's
newsroom, already known as a miserly place, has become bone dry: Travel requests are automatically refused, and reporters no longer take sources to lunch.
But Jones insists the magazine's problems are, at root, journalistic : "We need to be ahead of the curve, not behind it," he said.
Editor Lewis, who sat in on focus-group sessions in Calgary this week, insists that newsweeklies can still set agendas and have impact. "My proudest moment in journalism was when
an officer in the Canadian army called to say the armed forces were a better place already because of our story on rape in the military. A federal institution had to change because of
that series."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

80/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Earlier this year, Lewis launched a major redesign to give the magazine a cleaner, more serious look, with mixed success. Observers inside and out say the result looks too much like a
soft, monthly magazine and that its cover treatments, whatever the subject, lack punch.
Another source of internal division is managing editor Geoff Stevens. A veteran journalist , Stevens leans heavily toward a diet rich of politics and business; culture, said one insider,
seems to bore him. More seriously, said one Stevens critic, "His bedside manner is nonexistent. He has an unfortunate way of dealing with people."
Stevens acolyte Gwen Smith has also become a lightning road for resentment. Hired as business editor last year, Smith quickly tired of the late hours and lack of staff, complaining of
migraines. She has since been moved to another, less demanding editorial role, one that some critics argue doesn't deserve her assistant-managing-editor status and six-figure salary.
As seismic as these internal fluctuations may seem, to most readers the magazine has changed little in 20 years: The garnish may be new, but the meal still consists of the same
anonymous rehash of the week's news . Even to those who put it together, it often feels tired. "We have to have the courage not to chase the news , to avoid the bandwagon, and
strike out independently . . . and do things the papers and the TV stations aren't doing," said one writer.
Still, its readers remain loyal; subscription renewal rates are at an historic high. That may be part of the problem. While the core readership consists of people for whom Maclean's is a
main source of news (generally an older, relatively affluent and suburban demographic), this group is shrinking.
Advertisers have noticed. "You can reach the same group of people through cable TV, or through the national papers, which now are aiming at the same audience and have colour
presses," said a media consultant currently working with Maclean's.
At the same time, the universe is tougher for Canadian magazines in general, especially since the failure of Bill C-55 this year -- allowing U.S. publications to set up pseudo-Canadian
"split runs." In the wake of that defeat, Rogers executives considered pairing Maclean's up with a U.S. title such as Newsweek. This would have given the magazine a deep well of
foreign-reporting content, as well as preempting another Canadian competitor.
They decided against it: "A major thing for our readers is Maclean's Canadianness," Jones said. "We would be poking our readers in the eye if we were to do that."
More likely, Maclean's will decide to focus more strongly than ever on social trends, pop culture and lifestyle stories. While such material is part of any magazine's coverage (witness
the Nov. 29 Maclean's cover, "Jesus at 2000"), Maclean's has traditionally hewed much closer to government, crime and business- news stories than its American cousins.
Pokemon, of course, is unlikely to solve Maclean's identity crisis. What the debate highlights is the desire, shared by everyone at Maclean's, to return the magazine to the centre of
Canadian journalistic life, to produce a magazine that people eagerly await each week.
Some think those days are over, that newsmagazines are a medium of the past. "I just don't hear people referring to this great piece in Time they just read, or that piece in Newsweek,"
said Toronto Life's John Macfarlane.
Within Maclean's, some have begun to despair. Jones remains optimistic, but admits they are wrestling with a profound dilemma: How to be fresh and exciting, while remaining safe
and recognizable to those who don't want novelty.
"We have theories as to how that catch-22 can be avoided," Jones said. He promises to reveal them in January. If he opts for dramatic change , he will have satisfied his desire at least
temporarily: Maclean's, for a while at least, will be making headlines rather than following them.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvc401r0l

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

81/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Ads struggle to click on the Net Content creators are straining to find ways to attract ad dollars -- including making breakfast
cereal part of their plots
BRENDA DALGLISH

1731 words
25 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- The Seen, a Web-based show that incorporates elements of TV sitcoms, video games, animation and music videos, was created by three Toronto twentysomethings so fresh
that one of them is working night shifts in a mortuary to pay the bills.
The story line explores the quirks of their generation's quest for a life in the digital age. Adrian Carter, 26, says he and his two partners, Jeremy Diamond, 28, the mortuary worker, and
Denny Silverthorne, 26, are ready to sell out, get a government grant or do anything else it might take to get the show on the Internet .
There's the rub. Net gurus predict that Web shows like The Seen will be as popular in the future as Seinfeld was in its heyday.
But for now, multimedia shows such as The Seen are still in their infancy -- and so is the Internet advertising that could support them. Content creators such as Mr. Carter and his
partners, of Smiley Guys Studios, are still struggling to find a way to match their shows with the dollars of advertisers. But exactly how the two will get together -- if at all -- is still
unclear.
Smiley Guys Studios has one proposal up its sleeve -- to include the advertising product in the show.
"If it helps pay the cost of production, I'll work a box of corn flakes into the story," says Mr. Carter, whose main responsibilities are for design and production. "I'll make a box of corn
flakes the main character."
The integration of advertising into content may be necessary because Internet advertising as it stands is not catching on, says Ana Serano, director of the Canadian Film Centre's
MediaLinx habitat, a new media training program in Toronto where Mr. Carter and his partners met and began work on The Seen.
For every $10 spent on advertising in Canada last year, just 2 cents were spent on the Web, according to the Internet Advertising Bureau of Canada.
"We all know that advertising doesn't really work that well on the Net," Ms. Serano says, explaining that consumers, not content providers and certainly not advertisers, are in control on
the Internet and can avoid anything they're not interested in.
The very nature of the medium means users can easily bypass advertising, she says.
Not sure she's right? Here's a quick test: When was the last time you clicked on an Internet ad?
Ms. Serano and others are convinced that the Internet is going to mean dramatic changes in the way content is presented and is also likely to change some of the fundamentals of
advertising.
That view is controversial, however, and not generally shared by those who are already selling ad space on their Internet sites.
Brian Segal, publisher of Macleans magazine and vice-president at Rogers Media Inc., challenges the view that Internet ads draw less attention than ads in the traditional media. He
says other media, including TV, also lose their audience when people don't want to view the ads.
"The remote doesn't allow you to do that on television? I'd be loath to suggest the Net is not going to become an increasingly effective medium for advertisers."
Rogers Media is one of the pioneers in developing new media content in Canada. It is an offspring of Rogers Communications Inc., a cable and wireless communications company.
Internet advertising attracts about the same level of interest from consumers as advertising placed in newspapers , magazines and television, Mr. Segal says.
However, there is no ability to measure "consumer interest" in older media, making comparisons with the Internet extremely difficult.
To the extent that advertising is useful to consumers, it's well received on the Internet , says Graham Duffy, president and chief executive officer of Canoe LP, Sun Media Corp.'s online operation.
"They can avoid it if they want, but there are any number of studies that show that people are interested in advertising, too," Mr. Duffy says. "Advertising provides a service that people
value."
And the Internet provides an almost immediate ability to measure consumer response, says Hugh Stuart, vice-president of new media content at Rogers Media. It's not as easy to
determine how many people watched a television commerical, he says.
Consumer response to Internet ads, he says, depends heavily on the content of the Web page where they're placed, and Internet advertisers are quick to demand moves to Web
pages with more popular content.
A click-through rate of 2 to 3 per cent -- representing the percentage of viewers who actually click on a banner advertisement on a Web page -- is considered a reasonable level of
response for the Internet , Mr. Stuart says.
And that's probably not much different than the interest level in specific advertisments in traditional media, he adds. But his claim is hard to test, since older media lack the precise
measurement capabilities of the Internet .
Even if users don't click on them, banner ads build brand image and have a positive effect for an advertiser, he says.
Still, the Internet empowers consumers at the expense of advertisers, says Mr. Segal.
"We're moving towards a more efficient marketplace, where the consumer and the marketer have the same information," he says.
Consumers are in absolute control, says David Bradfield, specialist in the electronic communications group of National Public Relations. "A company's competitors are just a click away.
Consumers can always go somewhere else if they don't like the experience that they're receiving. The Internet is ruthless."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

82/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Advertisers cannot simply rely on passively inserting their messages onto the Internet with confidence that users will pay attention. Instead, they have to find new ways to attract them.
"In that kind of environment, how will advertising evolve?" asks Ms. Serano of the new media program.
"One way is that advertisers will essentially own intellectual property themselves. They will need this kind of content to be able to advertise their goods."
The concept is not new. The movie industry already sells advertisers the right to incorporate products into story lines. You've Got Mail, a recent movie about an E-mail romance,
showcases America Online Inc., an Internet service provider based in Dulles, Va. In a flurry of cross-promotion, AOL advertised the movie on a Web site called Love@AOL.
The Seen, for instance,would be an ideal Web vehicle to reach 18- to 35-year-olds, Ms. Serano says. It could be purchased by The Gap or Coke, or any other consumer product
makers whose goods are suited to the The Seen's target audience, she says, and products could be integrated into the story line.
Some advertisers have already begun experimenting with different ways to marry advertising and content.
Ragu spaghetti sauce, for instance, has an elaborate Web site featuring a soap-opera narrative that engages the user in a complicated Italian family drama called As the Lasagna
Bakes. Along with recipes and offers of newsletters, the Ragu Web site is intended to build a "community of interest," in Web jargon, with loyalty to the company's canned sauces.
"It's happening a lot," she says. "A lot of these consumer-based sites have stories with some kind of immersive experience in them related to their products."
Spaghetti sauce is a long way from the esteemed Canadian Film Centre's usual territory, but the centre was prodded by its founder, movie director Norman Jewison, to begin offering
training in new media production. Mr. Jewison was motivated by concern that if the country doesn't begin producing for the Internet , Canadian stories will be lost in the flood of content
that is already pouring out of the United States.
Canada is technologically advanced, to the degree that it has a higher proportion of households with high-speed broadband connections to the Internet than the United States. But it is
lagging in other ways.
Last year, companies spent more than $9-billion advertising in Canada, but only $21-million was spent on the Internet , according to estimates by the Internet Advertising Bureau of
Canada. In the United States, by contrast, an estimated $2-billion was spent on Internet advertising in 1998.
The modest spending, which is about twice what is spent on informercials in Canada, could be interpreted as proof of Ms. Serano's view that advertising isn't working.
Conversely, it could also reflect the typical Canadian reticence to experiment with unproven business opportunities.
"The magnitude [of Internet advertising] is disappointing, but the growth rate in Canada is quite interesting," Mr. Segal says, citing a forecast by the Internet advertising bureau that
ad spending on the Net will increase by almost 50 per cent to $38-million in Canada this year.
"The transaction rate will grow significantly over time," Mr. Segal predicts.
The Globe and Mail has five Internet sites and makes a small profit on the sale of advertising as well as database subscriptions, says Lib Gibson, vice-president of Globe Information
Services.
The newspaper makes much, though not all of its daily content, available free of charge over the Internet , Ms. Gibson says.
The Wall Street Journal is just about the only newspaper able to sell subscriptions on the Internet . She says The Globe's approach is more like that of The New York Times, which
makes its content available free of charge.
In that model, the more users can be attracted to a site, the higher the advertising rates that can be charged for it. "We believe we'll make money selling advertising," says Ms. Gibson.
For aspiring Web content producers like Mr. Carter and his partners, the promise of the Internet is close. But so far they're only making money enhancing corporate Web sites.
"Right now, we're looking for record labels that have big artists but terrible Web sites," laughs Mr. Carter.
The Seen still hasn't been.
Site seeing
www .canoe.ca [http://www.canoe.ca/] www .eat.com [http://www.eat.com/] www .cdnfilmcentre.com [http://www.cdnfilmcentre.com/] www .globeandmail.ca
[http://www.globeandmail.ca/]
CORRECTION
Hugh Stuart is managing director of At Home Canada Inc. Incorrect information was published yesterday in the Technology section. (Friday, March 26, 1999) (Page B2)
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv3p00fxy

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

83/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Liven up your browser
The Toronto Star
986 words
14 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

On The Edge
Robert Wright
Tired of your bland old Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator interface to the Net? Looking for something a bit more bright and funky?
Then check out NeoPlanet (http:// www .neoplanet.com/index.html [http://www.neoplanet.com/index.html]), a quasi-browser that is billed as "Your Internet Desktop."
The Web site says "NeoPlanet unites Content, Community, and Communications, by integrating a Web browser, e-mail client, instant messaging, chat, Web directory, search engine,
and user-created communities all into a single application."
But for my money (it is free to download), the best thing about it is that it lets you create your own custom "skins" or download and use skins created by others. At last look, there were
more than 350 skins you can download for free from the Web site. Customizability is cool.
LINING UP FOR LINUX: My column on Linux a few weeks back, "Corel aims to put Linux on your desktop," certainly touched a few nerve endings. I received several dozen e-mails in
response.
Most were highly complimentary, reflecting an optimism that the open source movement can remove the stranglehold Microsoft currently has over the industry.
But some, including several Linux/open source programmers, pointed out correctly that in my efforts to make a complex story more understandable, I was guilty of oversimplification.
Specifically, I gave Corel too much credit for its work on Linux.
Torsten Rahn said it best: "It would have been nice if you would have mentioned that Corel's `new' desktop is based on the famous rock-solid stable K Desktop Environment, which is
another open source project with hundreds of people involved (http:// www .kde.org [http://www.kde.org]). Furthermore `Corel's' Linux is based on the Debian distribution
(http:// www .debian.org [http://www.debian.org]).
"Yes, we are all happy that Corel put together a nice distro and added quite a lot of (its) own enhancements. But your article gives the wrong assumption that Corel developed a
Windows-like-desktop from scratch."
MP3 UPDATE: Another column that drew a healthy response was on the D'Music portable player from Pine Technologies, which will play regular CDs, as well as custom made CDs
filled with MP3 files. In his e-mail, reader Michael Wursta pointed out a couple of similar products coming down the pike: the $300 U.S. BRUJO MP3 player
( www .netdrives.com/brujo.asp [http://www.netdrives.com/brujo.asp]) and an as-yet-unnamed unit from Vertical Horizons Inc. (http:// www .evhi.com [http://www.evhi.com]). Both are
designed to be used as components in your home stereo and, like the D'Music, can play regular and MP3-filled CDs.
NET'S BIRTHDAY: A self-described "group of online enthusiasts from around the world" has set up a Web site to commemorate the Internet 's 30th birthday. Among other things, iDay
is declaring Wednesday Oct. 20th the "first International Internet Day." Check it out at http://iday.hypermart.net [http://iday.hypermart.net] and sign the virtual birthday card.
UNEVEN GROWTH: But as we reflect this week on the 30th anniversary of the Internet 's birth, and upon how technology is likely to impact our lives in the new millennium, it is worth
pondering the results of the United Nations' 1999 Human Development report. The august world body looked at access to technology in 174 countries and found that 88 per cent of
Internet users are from the rich industrialized nations of Europe and the West. Despite the fact that only one person in 10 speaks English, about 80 per cent of Web sites are in
English.
GOING PAPERLESS? So much for the paperless world. Early on in the Internet 's evolution (oh, about four years ago), over-zealous hypesters were fond of predicting that the Net
would relegate all printed media - books, magazines, newspapers - to history's trashheap - and fast!
(I was even warned brashly by a prominent and oft-quoted so-called " Internet expert," who had been attempting to get me to publish his columns, that it was of little consequence that
I had rejected his writing because The Star and other newspapers would be out of business anyways by 1996.)
But a recent report from the Boston Consulting Group predicts that while Web publishing will continue to grow in prominence, traditional publishing will also thrive. In fact, paper
consumption will double by 2003.
Readers, it seems, are reluctant to give up their books, newspapers and magazines for electronic versions.
" Predictions about the electronic substitution of paper-based media are often excessive," BCG Vice President Harri Andersson said in the report.
"Most paper applications provide portability and ease of use, as well as a certain privacy of use."
That's not to say traditional publishers will have it easy. Anderson predicts electronic media will pose a particular threat to the advertising base of paper publications.
NEW DIGICAMS: A year ago, megapixel digital cameras (ones that could capture more than a million pixels worth of information) were obligatory for the digicam set. Now two
megapixels seems to be the measure of quality.
Kodak is set to launch a pair of two-megapixel digital cameras that pack plenty of punch. The DC290 and DC280 come with autofocus, auto exposure and autoflash capabilities, as
well as a 20MB CompactFlash card and software bundle.
The DC290, which has a 3X optical zoom and other features aimed at the power user, will sell for about $1,700.
The DC280 comes in at about $1,200. Both are due out this month.
For those who only need megapixel power, Kodak will release the DC215 Zoom and Millennium 2000 special edition models. The latter comes with a gold metal body.
--Fast Forward editor Robert Wright can be reached at rwright@inforamp.net.
YEA BABY! Shagedelicize your interface with Austin Powers, or choose one of the hundreds of other skins available at the NeoPlanet Web site, .neoplanet.com. PIXEL POWER: Kodak's two-megapixel
camera, the DC290.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

84/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Document tor0000020010830dvae00zin

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

85/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business Magazine

BRAVE COOL WORLD
MICHAEL SMITH
1561 words
26 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
117
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Synthetic intelligence, digitally-enhanced humans, war on the Internet - that's the brave new world of futurist James Canton, president of the Institute for Global Futures , a California
think tank. A former executive with Apple Computer, Canton has just written a books called Technofutures: How Leading-Edge Technology Will Transform Business in the 21st Century.
Report on Business Magazine spoke with Canton before his speech at the Future of Technology conference in Toronto in November.
REPORT ON BUSINESS MAGAZINE: YOU TALK ABOUT KNOWLEDGE-BASED DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY. WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY THAT?
JC: Knowledge-based digital technology is all of the stuff that is currently being talked about in terms of E-business. It's data warehouses that provide relevant customer information,
it's how we develop products and services and how we collaborate with our co-workers; it's how we communicate between supplier, customer and ourselves; it's the way we display
information in virtual environments. It's also the very thinking about markets--virtual private markets that can emerge given this new blended reality, this merging of physical and virtual
reality. People don't realize just how fast these new complex technologies are merging unseen.
Much of how we will do business in this digital knowledge economy is going to be wireless, real time and everywhere.
Take a small thing today that's an indication of where we're going tomorrow: the distribution of music, the MP3 model. The major record companies--these are billion-dollar companies-have been brought to their knees by, if you will, a customer-led revolution that's a perfect example of the emerging digital economy. Major music stars--David Bowie, etc.--are now
distributing for free songs that you can download over the Internet . Today we're distributing music and software; tomorrow we're going to be distributing entire catalogues, entire
products, entire services over this distributed environment.
And by the way, less than 1.6% of the world is on the Internet ; three-quarters of the world hasn't even made its first phone call. So this is the Middle Ages.
I've seen this wave head toward the beach over the past 25 years, but I'll tell you, the emergence of the Internet and the implications for business will change every industry. The
most business-critical asset a company can have is this digital knowledge.
ROB MAGAZINE: YOU ALSO TALK ABOUT THE NETWORKED PLANET--WHAT YOU REFER TO AS THE "SOCIAL NEURO-WEB OF OUR COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUS."
JC: In my new book, Technofutures, I have about 50 scenarios about our lives in the future . One of them is something called the "megaverse." I'm forecasting that not even 15 to 20
years from today, we will have computers that surpass human intelligence. But well before that will be the emergence of the "megaverse"--the Internet will develop its own belief
systems, its own behaviour, its own kind of synthetic intelligence.
I think we're talking about parallel evolution. The evolution of human beings will be influenced at a very deep level by technology--the development of synthetic intelligence, which will
live in a virtual universe called the Internet . The convergence of human beings and this networked intelligence will occur in less than a decade.
Right now, we're in the Middle Ages in terms of proliferation of communication technologies. We're in the Middle Ages when it comes to understanding health, medicine, ourselves. All
of this--over the next three to five years and certainly the next eight to 15 years--is going to be transformed.
ROB MAGAZINE: HOW?
JC: Four specific power tools: The first is computers. Computers will be embedded in everything and everyone--smaller, superintelligent computers. We've got about 400 million
computer chips today in computers. We've got seven billion other computer chips that most people are unaware of, in car doors, in refrigerators, in books for inventory control. What
happens when all of those seven billion get wirelessly connected? And they will.
The second power tool is networks. Internet bandwidth will be the key competitive weapon that will transform business and will be a key advantage for education and health care. It
will be the key driver for telemedicine, for virtual education, for communications.
Just as computer power is doubling every nine months, corporate bandwidth is doubling every six months.
Now, this is in North America, but as satellite telecommunications come on line...wireless Internet access will drive culture, education, commerce, you name it. You'll hand somebody a
cellphone and it'll be attached to a satellite. Three-quarters of all the cellphones sold over the next 15 months will have Webcasting capabilities.
The third power tool is bioscience, which will extend life and unravel disease. But more importantly, this whole question of human evolution will be reinvented. We will have the tools to
choose sex, extend life, clone organs, transform and unravel the DNA code. What we're going to look like, how long we're going to live and the quality of our existence are going to be
transformed.
The fourth power tool is nanotechnology, the manipulation of matter at the atomic level. This is the most awesome of all and obviously could not exist without computers, bandwidth and
bioscience.
ROB MAGAZINE: I HATE TO USE THE PHRASE "BRAVE NEW WORLD."
JC: But it really is. You can actually say that now with some certainty because of the emergence of these power tools. You couldn't say that before.
Few people are really prepared for it. It used to be that every 500 years you'd have one or two technological breakthroughs--steel, or the factory or even the radio or TV. Think about
before the printing press. Knowledge was controlled by a wealthy elite.
Monks had a monopoly on hand-designing books, which only the wealthy could afford. Knowledge was not distributed. All of a sudden, you could now print books for pennies.
Knowledge could be distributed, you had a need for schools, you had a need for people to be able to read.
In the past 50 years there have been more technological innovations by a factor of 1,000-plus than in the previous 10,000. I'm predicting, as a futurist, that this is going to accelerate
dramatically because of these four power tools.
ROB MAGAZINE: AREN'T YOU FAILING TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT HUMAN RESISTANCE TO TECHNOLOGY, AS WELL AS TECHNICAL OBSTACLES? AFTER ALL, WE'VE BEEN
WAITING FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR 20 YEARS NOW, AND ALL WE HAVE IS A REALLY GOOD CHESS-PLAYING MACHINE.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

86/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

JC: It's getting harder to deny the emergence of this future . Let's take artificial intelligence. Today, if you were to ask the average person about artificial intelligence, they would say,
"Gee, I can't give you any applications." Few people realize that artificial intelligence is embedded in many objects. For instance, the camcorder [which uses] fuzzy logic to bring the
subject into focus is a form of artificial intelligence. The sensor-based technology that tells the refrigerator that the door is open...is a kind of artificial intelligence.
My point is that AI has become imbedded in many different kinds of products and applications. The telephone system, the TV--those systems are mediated and constructed using
different forms of artificial intelligence. Am I expecting a synthetic human to show up tomorrow? No. And I don't think we're going to see that for quite a long time. But I will say that
virtual personalities [are already] appearing on the Web...and we're working with companies that are building intelligent-agent interfaces. And here's the point: They don't have to be as
smart as us. All they have to do is be believable and have a purpose.
ROB MAGAZINE: WHAT KIND OF WORLD WILL OF THIS CREATE?
JC: The good, the bad and the ugly.
The good side is new economic opportunities, widespread education, widespread availability of knowledge, whether it's health care, extending life, whatever.
The bad news is there's going to be invasion of privacy, identity theft, data thieves that pull digital dollars out of your bank account. More importantly, we're going to be uncomfortable
with--rightfully so, and I'm warning people now to pay attention--the control that we give, the power that we yield to computer intelligence. Computers are going to do a better job of
some things, but are they going to be caring? What are the implications for living in a democratic society when you have computers influencing human lives?
The ugly side of technology is that it will break down and we'll be at risk. We already have millions of dollars that disappear from the financial system that get hacked away and nobody
really wants to talk about it. There are perils around us, but they will become more pronounced.
You can't have this utopia of a global, connected universe, where there's all this bounty, without some risks, without some obstacles, without some bumps along the way. The question
is, can we stomach the bioengineered food on the way to Nirvana? The answer may be "yes" and it may be "no"--but it's all going to happen in our lifetime.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvbq01pei

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

87/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

$46,568 in prizes!
The Toronto Star
1311 words
28 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Here's a description of the prizes in this year's digital art contest.
Apple Power Mac G4 and Cinema Flat-Panel Display ($11,000): The fastest personal computer in history. It is optimized to run graphics applications like Adobe Photoshop and
QuarkXPress, as well as digital video software such as Apple Final Cut Pro. Based on the brand-new G4 processor, the 450MHz version features 256MB of SDRAM, 1MB L2 cache,
Zip drive, DVD-RAM/DVD video drive, 100MHz system bus, 27GB Ultra ATA/66 hard drive, ATI Rage 128 graphics card with 16MB of SDRAM.
The sleek, elegant Apple Cinema Display features the largest LCD display on the market - 22-inches measured diagonally. Its viewable area is as big as a 24-inch cathode ray display,
and receives its data digitally from the computer, preserving the highest possible quality.
Apple Final Cut Pro ($1,500): This software combines professional video editing, compositing, and special effects in one flexible and highly productive program. Just connect your
computer to a camera that has digital video and FireWire connections, and you've got a complete personal video workstation.
Final Cut Pro Seminar ($1,500): Toronto-based Extra Bytes offers an intensive three-day digital video editing seminar at its studios for our Grand Prize winner.
Canon GL1 digital video camcorder ($3,800): Canon is leading the desktop digital video revolution with its lineup of incredible mini-DV digital video camcorders. The GL1 features
the professional quality L-Series Fluorite Lens, 20x optical/100x digital zoom, three CCD image sensors with pixel shift for producing broadcast quality digital video, optical image
stabilization movie, photo and frame movie shooting to accomodate video, still and audio recording needs, and a flexible 2.5-inch LCD view screen.
Adobe Software Suite ($3,578):
InDesign ($1,143): Speaks the language of professional designers, delivering unparalleled creative freedom, productivity, and precision for designing superb pages. Works seamlessly
with Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator, providing an integrated design environment that doesn't interrupt your creative process.
Photoshop 5.5 ($960): Features innovative artistic tools and enhanced Web features. It's is the first integrated tool set for taking your images from concept to completion in print and
on the Web, maximizing efficiency while helping achieve the finest-quality output.
After Effects 4.1 ($995): Long considered the software tool of choice for motion graphics designers and visual effects artists who want to produce professional quality work for film,
video, multimedia and the Web.
Adobe GoLive ($480): This award-winning professional Web design and publishing tool combines ease of use with precision and control - providing professional designers with the
flexibility and power they need to design, produce and maintain unique world-class Web sites.
Xerox DocuPrint NC60 Colour Laser Printer ($3,200): Features a built-in e-mail receiver that allows users to dispatch print -ready documents directly to it. Printing up to 4 pages per
minute colour and 16 ppm monochrome, the NC60 combines these innovative Internet -enabled features with technology advancements that produce superior colour print quality.
Kodak DC290 ($1,550): Builds on the award-winning DC260/265 digital camera platform. It features a 2.1-megapixel CCD sensor that captures images suitable for 11x14 inch prints,
autofocus, auto exposure, and autoflash capabilities with a 3x (33 to 99mm equivalent) optical zoom. Flash sync and an accessory lens mount (to support 37mm lenses and filters) put
it in league with traditional professional cameras.
CorelDRAW 9 Graphics Suite ($950): The latest in a long line of award-winning illustration and image-editing software. This amazing suite gives you powerful interactive tools for
creating dynamic special effects and bitmap images. Live Effects make it easy to experiment without losing your previous work. Plus, top-rated output capabilities help you get
professional results.
Microsoft Office 98 for Macintosh ($800): The most significant release of Office ever created for the Macintosh platform. Office 98 Macintosh edition includes Word 98, Excel 98,
PowerPoint 98, Outlook Express and Internet Explorer. This version helps users get better results with less effort, with stronger than ever communication and collaboration features.
Hewlett-Packard S20 PhotoSmart Photo Scanner ($700): The quickest and easiest way to digitize your existing photographs, slides and negatives. It comes with PhotoSmart photo
scanning and Microsoft Picture It! software. Resolution is 300 dots per inch for print and 2400 dpi optical for slides and negatives.
RCA RC5223P DVD Player ($500): The ultimate format for high-quality home entertainment, feature films and music. RCA DVD players allow unprecedented interactivity and easy
navigation, letting users instantly switch between screen formats, camera angles and parental control choices - whatever options are enclosed on the disc.
RCA LYRA ($330): A skip-free, personal digital audio player that delivers music from a CompactFlash memory card that stores compressed music files organized on a home
computer. Smaller than a cell phone, the RCA LYRA is 4.5x2.5".
3Com Palm IIIe ($300): Say goodbye to your bulky paper planner. The easy-to-use, affordable Palm IIIe connected organizer is all the organizer you need. Store thousands of names,
addresses, appointments, memos, to do items, expense items, even e-mail.
The four adult winners and Under-17 and Under-13 kids winners each receive these prizes:
Kodak DC215 Millennium 2000 Edition ($750): Designed to fit in a shirt pocket, the 2X optical zoom Kodak megapixel (1152x864 pixels) the DC215 features a compact gold metal
body. It is the most compact in Kodak's extensive digital camera line, it ships with an 8MB CompactFlash card and a USB card reader.
Corel WordPerfect Office 2000 Standard Edition ($600): Designed for maximum ease of use, WordPerfect Office 2000 Standard Edition is packed with features that help you get the job
doneL Powerful word processing to create simple or complex documents; Web publishing tools; create spreadsheets that give data meaning and presentations that make an impact.
Hewlett-Packard DeskJet 832C colour inkjet printer ($300): Offers easy-to-use, brilliant photo-quality printing solutions and the best everyday printing to every customer. The printer
supports both PC and USB-connect Macintosh systems and offers both parallel and USB ports. Print speeds are up to 8 pages per minute.
Microsoft Software Suite ($340):
Encarta Reference Suite 2000 ($150): Advanced multimedia reference suite includes Encarta Encylopedia Deluxe, Encarta Interactive World Atlas, Encarta World English Dictionary
and Encarta Online Deluxe.
Microsoft Works Suite 2000 ($160): Something for everyone with several popular home software titles, including Word, and the Canadian version of Microsoft Money 2000.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

88/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Pandora's Box ($30): A journey that includes 350 visually stunning puzzles, divided among 10 different puzzle types, including 3-D puzzles. Designed by the creator of Tetris.
ATI All-in-Wonder 128 ($300): The ultimate PC upgrade card for maximum fun, is powered by ATI's leading graphic technology, RAGE 128GL, with 16MB of memory to deliver the
ultimate 3D experience. Includes an "Intelligent" TV Tuner, digital VCR software, video output, DVD video playback, still and motion video capture and much more.
Creative Labs SoundBlaster Live MP3+ ($200): Uses the powerful EMU10K1 audio processor to process audio and effects so you'll get full, rich sound for digital authoring and
playback of MP3, .wav, Internet , MIDI, and CD audio. Connect to multi-channel, digital speakers for an engulfing surround-sound experience.
Creative Labs Video Blaster WebCam 3 ($150): Gives you the power to capture, create, and communicate in full-color, full-motion video directly from your PC.
M&S 2000 Canadian Encyclopedia World Edition ($90): Offering a new look, more content and features than ever before, the 2000 Canadian Encyclopedia World Edition allows all
students to point and click their way to higher education and fun.
Adobe PhotoDeluxe Home Edition ($80): Makes it easy to bring photos into your computer, organize them in albums, and improve them.
Document tor0000020010830dvas012mr

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

89/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Facts & Arguments

SOCIAL STUDIES A daily miscellany of information by Michael Kesterton The best of both worlds
The Globe and Mail

640 words
3 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A20
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

One of life's newer coping mechanisms is take-out dinner from the company cafeteria, writes Richard Gibson in The Wall Street Journal. Several U.S. corporations offer this item on
their benefits buffet. Hallmark Cards Inc. in Kansas City, Mo., has one of the more successful operations; its 120-item menu includes appetizers, entrees and school lunches for busy
parents to take home.
Words being born?
Recent announcements about coinages:
-- " 'Feminist' was always a little too dainty sounding, so call the new [feminine] consciousness 'femaleist,' " says Barbara Ehrenreich, writing about gender differences in the current
issue of Time magazine. "The femaleist premise could be summarized as: 'Yes, we are different -- wanna make something of it?' "
-- Alisa Gordaneer, features editor of the Detroit Metro News , writes from cyberspace: "A new word for you, published first in [my newspaper ] in October, 1998, and which seems to
be catching on as far away as California: 'Cuddletech,' refers to computers (such as the iMac) cars (such as the new VW Beetle) and other industrial [designs] that have rounded, userfriendly lines" and are desired for their cuddly visual appeal.
-- "I work buying and selling old enlargers and old photographic hardware," writes Harry Kane, also of cyberspace, "and [I] coined the word 'industriana' to describe pieces of the
industrial age. It is the first English usage on the World Wide Web as only a Coca-Cola collector lists that word although I could not find it in his site."
-- In his novel The Extra Man (Scribner) Jonathan Ames invents the term "trisexual" and creates a character who cross-dresses and is neither gay nor straight.
-- Scientist and writer Arthur C. Clarke has given The Sunday Telegraph his "extrapolations" for the next century, including: "2050 . . . Bored by life in this peaceful and unexciting era,
millions [decide] to use cryonic suspension to emigrate into the future in search of excitement. Vast 'hibernacula' are established in the Antarctic, and in the regions of perpetual night
at the lunar poles."
Ask a journalist
-- When I'm at home, I get a congested nose, itchy eyes and shortness of breath. What gives? Have you been handling your iguana? Dr. John Kelso, head of the allergy division of the
Naval Medical Center in San Diego, Calif., finds that scaly pets as well as furry creatures can cause allergic reactions.
-- When my boss smiles at me, how do I know she's sincerely pleased? Fake smiles last longer than real ones, writes Daniel McNeill in The Face: A Guided Tour. Any expression over
10 seconds long, and most over five, is false. When she smiles, count silently: "One Saskatchewan, two Saskatchewan . . ."
Mondo advertising
-- In the not-so-distant future , writes John Ellis of The Boston Globe, the average consumer will have a digital television recording system that will enable her to zap the advertising
out of favourite shows, equivalent technology in her car radio, a telephone that has caller-ID and software that blocks Internet advertising she doesn't want to see. "No one will pay
advertising agencies billions of dollars every year to not reach consumers." He predicts that ad agencies will become consulting agencies; they will become Internet firms; they will
form joint ventures with telecommunications companies to manage and market their databases.
-- Beginning this week, 340 Wells Fargo automated banking machines in San Francisco are displaying animated ads while they are idle and during the wait for a transaction to be
completed and print a discount coupon on the back of the paper record.
Thought du jour
"Man becomes man only by the intelligence, but he is man only by the heart." -- Henri Frederic Amiel. Michael Kesterton can be reached at MKesterton@globeandmail.ca and
tacit@sympatico.ca.
Document glob000020010827dv3300aub

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

90/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

E-mail delivers grammar lesson
ANNE M. PETERSON
390 words
14 January 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

San Francisco -- Computer correspondence does not lead to reduced sentence complexity, poor grammar or an abundance of typos, says a researcher at the University of Texas.
And contrary to popular belief, it does not appear to lead to a homogenous style among users. Instead, writers cultivate their own style, perhaps to compensate for the impersonal
nature of computers.
These are some of the findings of researcher Susan Herring, who's been studying the evolution of an early discussion list on the Arpanet, the Internet 's predecessor. The list was
much like the Internet news groups of today and included the archived messages from 1975 to 1986 of about 100 computer science professionals.
"This should reassure parents who think their children's grammar will suffer because of the Internet ," Prof. Herring said. She was addressing the recent annual meeting of the Modern
Language Association, which considered, among other things, how the computer revolution is changing language.
The Internet provides an interesting laboratory for examining language changes , Prof. Herring said, noting how computer talk is crawling into general use. Take the "smiley," the
combination colon and end-parenthesis -- :) -- that indicate a happy face in Net-speak.
"Smiley faces have been around for a long time, where they were right side up," she said. "The Internet turned them sideways. Now, I see more and more people putting them in
letters and notes that way."
Prof. Herring also found that computer correspondence tends to become less formal, and in fact, less polite, than other communication.
Other researchers looked at the more subtle ways the World Wide Web was affecting language. Lisa Gerrard of the University of California examined nearly 200 Web sites created by
women, with a primary audience of women.
Overall, the sites challenged traditional stereotypes -- or tried to tweak them. References to "chicks" and "bimbos," for example, were used in an empowering way.
Kenneth Rivers of Lamar University in Beaumont, Tex., spoke on the use of French on the Internet -- or the lack of it.
There wasn't a French search engine on the World Wide Web until February, 1996, Prof. Rivers said. Today, only 2 per cent of what is available on the Internet is in French. Most of
what's on the Net is in English.
Document glob000020010827dv1e001uy

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

91/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Internet's growth levelling off
The Toronto Star
840 words
4 November 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

On The Edge
Robert Wright
Are the Net's days numbered? Not likely. But after years of spectacular growth, the Internet 's popularity has apparently hit a plateau. By some counts, it has even begun to decline.
According to a survey by Nielsen/NetRatings, reported by ZDNet, the number of Internet users in September was 109,993,829, up about 1.3 per cent over August's figure of
108,588,708.
But when you look at the number of people who actually surfed the Net during the month, it was down 2.8 per cent: to 64.9 million from 66.8 million in August.
Nielsen/NetRatings stats are based on data collected from over 33,000 Internet home users.
Statistical blip or a sign of something larger? Allen Weiner, VP of Analyst Services at NetRatings:
"The answer is quite simple: For now, the months of double-digit growth have reached a plateau. The next round of mega-growth is likely to happen sometime in the next few years
when fat pipes (aka higher speed connections) permeate the home market.
"That will bring those who left the Web because of slow access speeds back, as well as attract an entirely new market of those lured by the thrill of real sound and video."
Another study by online measurement service Media Metrix showed similar results.
It found that U.S. Web users increased about 2 per cent to 63.4 million, far below the usual 4 per cent per month growth rate.
According to Henry Blodgett, influential Internet securities analyst for Merrill Lynch, "we believe it may well be another sign of the flattening of the growth of Web users in the U.S."
WEB WOES: We all know the Internet has its downside: Viruses, spam, child porn, annoying banner ads and database profilers, to name a few. But how bad is it really?
Bad enough that it's time it was regulated, according to Robert Cailliau, the co-inventor of the World Wide Web .
"There was a time when the community that was on the Net was homogenous and civilized," Cailliau told Forbes online . "Now it's not. We're in the middle of chaos.
"It may calm down," he adds, "But the alternative is that there's a total meltdown of the system and that it becomes unusable. That would be a catastrophe.
"We must regulate (the Web) if we want to have some civilization left. And it's getting urgent."
Cailliau and Tim Berners-Lee were colleagues in the early 1990s at Geneva's European Laboratory for Particle Physics (a 20-country research collaboration known by its French
acronym, CERN). Together they proposed and developed the underlying standard that forms the basis of the Web.
So how does the 52-year-old Belgian envision civilizing the Web? First on his list is to get rid of the banner ads, which slow things down and cheapen the Net experience.
"The forced influence of advertising has given us completely useless TV," he notes.
To reduce dependence on ads, Cailliau suggests the Web adopt a system of micropayment: every time you call up a page, your account is charged a fraction of a cent.
"It would change the landscape completely if (Web-site owners) could live by providing a high-quality, responsive service," says Cailliau.
Another idea: License Internet users.
"To get a licence, people would have to learn basic behaviour: choosing an Internet service provider; connecting to the Web; writing e-mails; problem diagnosis; censoring your own
computer; and setting up a site. More important than that: knowing what dangers to expect and knowing how the Internet can influence others.
"Everybody thinks that licenses are perfectly all right on the roads, because of the danger to life and limb. But one can equally cause a lot of harm by spreading false and dangerous
information. Sooner or later someone is going to be able to trace the death of a person to an Internet act. Then (the licensing question) will probably be taken seriously."
E-CONOMY BOOMING: But it's not all bad news from the Net this week. According to a study by University of Texas economists, sponsored by networking giant Cisco Systems, the
" Internet Economy" grew 68 per cent - to $108 billion U.S. from $64 billion - from the first quarter of 1998 to the first quarter of 1999.
The study also found:
The Net economy pumped an estimated $507 billion into the U.S. economy and employed 2.3 million Americans. It has become larger than industries such as telecommunications
($300 billion) and airlines ($355 billion).
"What is clear from our research is that the Internet Economy is an economic phenomenon never seen before," said Dr. Anitesh Barua, co-head of the study.
For more details, see www .InternetIndicators.com [http://www.InternetIndicators.com/].
--Fast Forward editor Robert Wright can be reached at rwright@inforamp.net.
xxxxx xxxxxxxx: xxx xxxxxxxx Web sites like CitySearch will be the successfule-commerce model of the .
Document tor0000020010830dvb4013mt

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

92/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

CHAT ROOM
Report on Business: Technology

E Ink could make lasting impression
EMMA SMITH
1088 words
2 September 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

A lot of people these days are busy predicting that the Internet will bring the demise of the printed word. Web sites will replace newspapers , and E-zines will replace the magazines
we pick up at newsstands.
I've always been skeptical about this prediction -- and just a little afraid as well. I love print and can't imagine a world where I'd have to read everything from a screen.
But last week my sister E-mailed me an article about a company in Cambridge, Mass., that may have the perfect solution. The company, E Ink Corp. ( www .eink.com
[http://www.eink.com/]), has developed an exciting technology called Immedia, which is a thin, smooth, flexible display that can be placed on any medium, from paper and cloth to
cellphones and appliances.
The secret behind Immedia is electronic ink. Although it looks just like traditional ink to the naked eye, when electronic ink is exposed to an electric charge it changes colour and can
display changing images.
This means that words and images on a paper sign can be changed immediately and remotely, at the drop of a hat.
This new technology has endless potential. I like what it means for store owners who spend tons of money printing expensive colour signs to advertise in-store promotions. Currently,
the price you print is the price you advertise, so if you decide to drop prices you have to print a whole new batch.
Once signs are printed, you have to send employees scurrying all over the store to climb ladders and hang the signs announcing the newest specials. As a business owner, I'd rather
have those employees on the floor, working the cash registers and serving customers.
Using Immedia displays for retail signage is just one of many applications E Ink is exploring. Consider what electronic ink means for books, newspapers and magazines.
Instead of shipping my copy of Time through the mail every week, the publishers could eventually use E Ink's technology to automatically reload the magazine's contents for me every
Monday. The best part about this is that I can get a new magazine without a single tree coming down. When we consider Time's millions of subscribers worldwide, this idea quickly
starts to have huge potential.
But I'm not completely convinced. Who's to say that, in another five years or so, hackers won't be able to tap into my bookshelves and change the ending of, say, Crime and
Punishment? Document security is going to be interesting if this technology is widely adopted.
And do I really want to have to plug in my magazine? For starters, I like to read on the beach, on the bus and in the tub. I don't want to worry about getting sand in between the pages
and jamming up the system. I certainly don't want to worry about getting electrocuted while I read.
Again, though, E Ink is one step ahead of me. Immedia displays actually use very little power and can be battery operated. A book made out of Immedia would look exactly like books
today, except for the battery and a removable chip in the binding that would allow one book to become any book I wanted.
But aside from portability, there are other aspects of the reading experience that I hope E Ink's scientists and developers will figure out a way to retain.
First of all, when I read a book, I like to fold over the pages and underline passages. I wrote to E-Ink to ask if this is going to be possible with electronic ink and they assured me they're
working on it.
I guess, when it comes to pleasure reading, I like that musty old paper smell and the knowledge that the book I'm reading has been passed from bedside table to bedside table.
That said, there are certainly some books I'd love to read courtesy of Immedia displays. Dictionaries and encyclopedias for starters. Anything that is too out of date to be useful a month
after you buy it. How about software manuals? The movie guide I get in my stocking each year? The phone book? I'd love to get these documents automatically reloaded by the
publishers each month.
These, of course, are precisely the kind of books that smart Web producers have already put on-line.
Some of my favourite on-line "resource books" are www .dictionary.com [http://www.dictionary.com/] and www .thesaurus.com [http://www.thesaurus.com/]. Both provide quick
answers when you're stuck for a word. Or check out www .encyclopedia.com [http://www.encyclopedia.com/].
For technology definitions, nothing beats www .whatis.com [http://www.whatis.com/]. It's simply a great way to get a quick answer when you're desperately trying to figure out just what
an avatar is.
I'm also a regular visitor to www .canadapost.ca/CPC2/addrm/pclookup/pclookup.shtml [http://www.canadapost.ca/CPC2/addrm/pclookup/pclookup.shtml] where I can quickly and
easily search for Canadian postal codes. My on-line replacement for the annual movie guide book is www .allmovie.com [http://www.allmovie.com/]. Here I can search by actor, movie
title, plot and even keyword.
Taking this electronic book idea just one step further, I'd like to see electronic ink solving the problem of out-of-date information altogether. Not just for resource books and store signs,
but for small things that I'm constantly throwing away and replacing. Things like take-out menus, coupons, the TV Guide and listings from my local second-run theatre.
With electronic ink technology being used for menus I'd know immediately if the local Indian restaurant had a new dish available. Similarly (though less appealing somehow) my
professor could update my course outline and reading lists from home, immediately informing my classmates and me about important changes to class times and assignments.
Electronic delivery may not be the right solution for all of our reading experiences -- there's still nothing like a dogeared paperback to kick back with. But the more I think about it, the
more I can dream that new technologies just may be able to help keep the wealth of information that is scattered around my apartment somewhat up to date.
Which would be a very good thing -- in my book anyway.
Emma Smith is the founding president of Canada's Wired Woman Society and is currently working with the Internet and Telecoms Convergence Consortium at MIT. She can be
reached at emma@e-think.net.
Document glob000020010827dv92019fn

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

93/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Projections of the future Film is nearing the end of its reel as the movie industry gets ready for digital distribution and the
elimination of celluloid strips. Now, players from small-town cinemas to the biggest studios are scrambling to write the script
for E-cinema.
SIMON TUCK
2294 words
28 October 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Carleton Place, Ont. -- As the proud owner of a two-screen cinema chugging along on 50-year-old equipment, Malik Zekry is an unlikely supporting actor in the movie industry's great
technological leap to the filmless film.
But Mr. Zekry, owner of Carleton Place Cinemas, can't wait for E-cinema, as the move to the digital distribution of movies is often called. He sees it as perhaps the last, best chance to
turn around his money-losing operation and prevent the lone movie theatre in Carleton Place from following the same sad script that has been played out in dozens of smaller
communities in Eastern Ontario and throughout the country.
Many Canadian towns have already seen their local cinemas mothballed, torn down or converted into bingo halls as rising costs and increased competition from nearby cities have
taken their toll. In most cases, the cinema is one of the few local entertainment venues and community gathering spots used for other types of events.
For theatres such as his, says Mr. Zekry, E-cinema may provide a Hollywood ending after all. "It gives me hope to hold on," he says, while shuffling around the projection room in the
130-year-old former church. "If it happens, it will be almost like a dream come true."
Joseph Butt, the author of a new report on E-cinema, supports Mr. Zekry's hope.
Digital movies should allow owners of smaller theatres -- not to mention the high-tech multiplex theatres -- to offer technically superior films and much more variety, says Mr. Butt, an
analyst with Forrester Research Inc. in Cambridge, Mass. "I would say the local mom-and-pops with one screen will still be at a disadvantage, but it will be a lot better," he says. "It
helps position them as multiscreen theatres."
While most of the people who make films now use digital sound, cameras and editing techniques, the people who distribute and show films use technology left over from previous
generations.
Digital technology will allow films to be distributed as bits and bytes through satellite, on fibre-optic lines or even over the Internet , instead of expensive 35-millimetre prints squeezed
into bulky film canisters.
That will allow cinemas to make lineup changes almost with the flick of a switch and will drastically cut distribution costs. Consumers likely won't see immediate savings, but the
efficiencies gained from the technology could curtail increases in ticket prices.
Mr. Butt says a technological change that big is sure to breed conflict between various players in the film industry, as they scramble to grab their part of the savings and avoid getting
stung with capital costs. But he feels there are too many benefits and too much potential savings to let the unresolved questions and hang-ups fall by the wayside.
The stakes are huge:
-- Cheaper distribution. The average big-budget Hollywood movie racks up more than $15-million (U.S.) in distribution costs as it is sent out to the cinemas that control North America's
30,000 screens.
The largest items in the distribution budgets are printing -- about $2,000 for each print of each movie -- and shipping and insurance, which cost about $1,000 per print . Mr. Butt says
digitization will shrink distribution costs by about 90 per cent.
-- Better quality visuals. Although the quality of digital video has been its Achilles' heel, it's expected to be a higher-grade technology than film in the long run. Unlike film prints,
digital isn't subject to colour drift, degeneration and fading, dust and dirt, or even tears. But digital proponents admit the short-term goal is to be able to produce images that are at
least as good as film.
-- Greater box office sales. Digital means instant distribution, which means the ability to switch films on the fly. Mr. Butt says an unpopular film could instantly be dropped in favour of a
hot one and that even small theatres could run a different movie every night of every week on every screen.
The added choice will mean more revenue for cinema owners. "If nobody comes to see Wild Wild West on Friday night, you can switch over to American Pie on Saturday," says Mr.
Butt. "It helps position them as multiscreen theatres." Lucas bestows a new hope
The transition to digital distribution got a big push this summer when Star Wars creator George Lucas hosted special screenings of his latest opus in digital format in Los Angeles
and New York.
The June 18 screenings of Star Wars: Episode 1 -- The Phantom Menace were an important milestone, says Mr. Butt, because they demonstrated that digital technology can produce
a high-quality image.
He says Mr. Lucas's action will encourage other studios to keep pace, although widespread acceptance is at least five years off.
Even with that kind of lag, the Star Wars screening is an important symbol, says Dina Lebo, executive director at the Motion Picture Theatre Associations of Canada. "It was a big step
because it was the first time a Hollywood heavy was legitimizing the digital process."
But the industry's big players, who held a key discussion on the issue earlier this year in Las Vegas, face an Imax-sized snag: money.
Even though digital cinema is likely not coming soon to a movie theatre near you, its hefty price tag has set off a cat-and-mouse game over who will pick up the tab, including an
estimated $2-billion to $3-billion for new projection equipment in North America.
"It's basically who blinks first," says Mr. Butt.
The industry is trying to avoid duplicating the waste it endured earlier this decade when moviemakers and cinemas failed to establish an industry standard for digital sound, and
instead forced many players to invest in four competing technologies.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

94/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

To make digital -video issues even stickier, the business model will have to be worked out by parties -- moviemakers, distributors and the cinema industry -- that have been frequent
foes. All sides realize that the early decisions made on matters such as control and payment of the hardware will go a long way in determining the winners and losers in the transition.
Smaller cinema operators such as Mr. Zekry may end up written out of the script if they get no financial help from distributors or moviemakers.
A quick peek at the price tag explains why. Mr. Butt says digital projectors cost about $250,000, but are expected to tumble to between $100,000 and $150,000 as the economies of
scale kick in over the next few years. By contrast, projectors for standard 35-mm films cost about $60,000.
"It will mean ripping out the projection equipment that's in place and disposing of it somehow and replacing it with new technology," says Marcia Davies, spokeswoman for Cineplex
Odeon Corp., one of Canada's two dominant cinema chains.
The filmmaking industry had little trouble converting to digital cameras earlier in the decade, but that didn't require so much costly new equipment. Despite the unresolved money
matters, the benefits of the transition still outweigh the drawbacks, Mr. Butt says.
Ms. Davies says small-time operators rarely invest in new technology and will likely be the last to go digital . "They just do not spend money on their theatres."
That's because it's not easy making ends meet when you're running a cinema in a small town, says Mr. Zekry. Small-time operators can pay a distributor up to 75 per cent of the total
revenue they get for a full house if they want to show a hot Hollywood movie, he says. The alternative is to show a less popular film that may mean rows of empty seats.
Some industry officials say theatre operators shouldn't expect too much from digital distribution.
But the head of Canada's largest film producer and distributor, says the cost of distribution ranks far below that of production or cinema operations.
"It's not that big a windfall," says Michael MacMillan, chairman and chief executive officer of Alliance Atlantis Communications Inc., of the expected long-term savings from digital .
No matter how big the pie, industry officials agree there's one group that probably won't get a slice -- consumers.
Mr. Butt of Forrester Research says consumers' willingness to pay more for the superior sound of a compact disc during that technology's infancy gives the industry confidence that it
won't have to drop box-office prices. "People have shown in the past they'll pay more for quality and there's no reason to believe they won't do it again."
Mr. MacMillan says consumers may not have to pay more for digital images but savings from distribution costs might keep prices near current levels for a little longer.
Independents await their day
Supporters of E-cinema say the technology is a sure-fire hit.
"The genie is out of the bottle," says Peter Sandmark, national co-ordinator for the Independent Film and Video Alliance, a Montreal-based non-profit association of independent
filmmakers. "I'm not sure you can stop it."
Despite the Lucas boost and the apparent benefits, digitally distributed movies could be more than five years away from hitting the mainstream for simply practical concerns, Mr.
MacMillan says. "The current system works well and there's been a lot of capital invested in North American cinemas in recent years."
That gap could further open the door to small-time and independent filmmakers, who have already received a big boost from the lower costs associated with digital sound and film
production. "It's going to get a lot more people into it -- quicker," says Mr. Sandmark.
Perhaps it already has. The number of applicants for Canada Council film grants jumped by almost 50 per cent in the six-month period that ended in April, compared with the same
period a year earlier. David Poole, head of media arts at the council, says digital technology makes filmmaking more accessible.
Others say the big winner will be those able to drive the digital world beyond just the cheaper distribution of the latest Bruce Willis flick. Immersion Studios Inc. of Toronto makes
interactive digital -cinema content that its chief executive officer describes as a cross between films and video games.
"This is a product that's feeding directly into the Digital Age," says Stacey Spiegel of his company's films, which unfold based upon moviegoers' manipulation of a touch-screen
navigator. "I don't think the studios get it yet -- I hope they don't."
In the big picture, digital distribution will mean that digitization will be dominant in two of the industry's three key cost areas -- production and distribution.
The third, marketing, may be a tougher hill to climb but not impossible. Movie industry officials say the surprise horror hit The Blair Witch Project was a landmark in that it was the first
box-office smash to use the Internet as an integral part of its marketing efforts, before and after its release.
That success opens a great path for independent filmmakers -- and may act as a warning shot across the industry's bow. Mr. Sandmark says well-heeled film corporations have the
resources to respond to cracks in their markets and the tendency to do so.
"I think it presents a great opportunity but I'll bet large companies that control and make money are going to fight tooth and nail not to give it up." Site seeing www .thx.com
[http://www.thx.com/] www .qualcomm.com [http://www.qualcomm.com/] www .forrester.com [http://www.forrester.com/]
THE E-CINEMA SCENE
The use of digital technology to make movies is poised to take film right out of the industry. Digital distribution networks are expected to overthrow existing delivery systems, though
mainstream acceptance may be at least five years off.
Here's how it will work:
The movies, trailers and advertising that eventually end up in your local cinema are shot using either digital cameras or 35-mm film. For those still using film, the images could be
transferred to bits and bytes to make them compatible with the digital distribution network.
The images are then digitally compressed and encrypted.
From there, the images are zipped around the world over an electronic distribution network. Although few in the movie industry doubt that digital is the wave of the future , there's
great debate about what that distribution network will look like.
A point-to-point system, such as one that uses fibre-optic lines, is a candidate, but that would mean distribution only for those communities with high-powered networks. Some type of
broadcast transmission, satellite for example, is more likely because no new wiring is needed and it allows for greater geographical reach.
The cinemas then download the images and store them on a hard drive. As with film's traditional delivery network, digital distribution would occur prior to the showing of the film, says
Stacey Spiegel, chief executive officer of Immersion Studios Inc., a Toronto company that makes interactive movies.
Once on the cinema's hard drive, the images would run through a digital projector where they're decrypted and projected for moviegoers. Unlike 35-mm films, digital films can be
projected countless times without losing image quality.
Although this new distribution network isn't expected to mean lower prices for consumers, it will almost certainly mean more choices at the box office.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

95/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvas01jov

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

96/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

News Business

It's an E-Christmas as shoppers flock on-line Surging demand has Internet retailers hopping
MARINA STRAUSS
1514 words
18 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- It's 6:30 a.m. and Rick Segal, president of Chapters Online Inc., is on his way to work, but not to his usual downtown office destination. Instead, on this dark and chilly
morning nine days before Christmas, he's headed to Chapters' warehouse outside Toronto, where he'll be packing and sorting the backlog of books -- something he's helped out with all
week.
So overloaded is the Chapters warehouse that customer orders are being delayed by two or three days -- or more -- forcing Mr. Segal this week to apologize to many irate customers.
In an E-mail, he also promised them free upgraded shipment to get gifts delivered by Christmas. It's a service that will cost money-losing Chapters "thousands of dollars" extra, he said.
"Every able-bodied, breathing human being that has a Chapters badge that I can find is out here doing their thing on the warehouse floor," Mr. Segal said during a break.
"It's one of those weird things. The good news is that I'm piled up to the ceiling with orders."
Welcome to the hassle-free world of on-line Christmas shopping where, at the click of the mouse, customers can seemingly get the chore done virtually without effort.
If feedback from major on-line retailers is any sign, shoppers are flocking to the Internet this holiday season. "Time is a big factor," said Sherry Morris, 35, an on-line shopper who has
two small children and a full-time job in advertising. "To go to a mall this time of year is insane. This way I don't have to drag my kids through it."
But another reality is emerging this E-Christmas -- the first on-line for a good number of Canadian retailers -- as some E-shoppers discover the underbelly of dot-com retailing: late
deliveries, slow Web sites and spotty customer service. At stake is an estimated $282-million of on-line gift shopping in Canada this holiday season. It's a mere 5 per cent of the total
season's spending, but if consumers' first Christmas on-line is a painful one, it may be their last, observers warn.
"The real test is on the service side, and getting what you want on time," said retail consultant Jim Okamura at J. C. Williams Group Ltd. in Toronto. "Everyone is just crossing their
fingers."
They shouldn't cross their fingers if they're trying to order a Barbie or Hot Wheels personal computer on-line for Christmas, products being offered by Patriot Computer Corp. of
Markham, Ont., through a licensing agreement with toymaker Mattel Inc. That's because Pioneer has thrown up its hands and warned customers it can't deliver until the new year.
One angry customer said he ordered a Barbie PC -- at a total cost of about $1,000 -- on Nov. 30, and was guaranteed that he'd have it in time for Christmas. On Wednesday, when he
casually called just to confirm the delivery, he learned he wouldn't get it by Dec. 25.
"I have two girls expecting a Barbie computer this Christmas," said the businessman, who asked that his name not be used because he is now searching the traditional stores for the
computer for his daughters, 5 and 7.
It was his first experience shopping on-line and "I probably won't do any more this Christmas." He was particularly upset with what he described as the "appalling" response from a
Patriot representative.
Patriot's www .barbiepc.com [http://www.barbiepc.com/] and www .hotwheelspc.com [http://www.hotwheelspc.com/] sites have been so deluged with demand that they posted a
flashing message last week saying: "Due to the volume of orders we are unable, at this time, to guarantee delivery by Christmas. We are doing everything possible for delivery early in
the new year."
Bigger companies have also been compelled to back down on their guarantees. U.S.-based Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the world's largest retailer, placed a note on its Web site 10 days ago
warning that it can't ensure shipment by Christmas.
At Patriot, vice-president John Durst said volume at its Barbie and Hot Wheels sites has been double the company's expectations . He attributed the delays to a faulty part that
couldn't be replaced until last week. Another Patriot spokesman said yesterday that the faulty component has delayed the shipment of about 40,000 of the computers, Associated Press
reported.
In a bid to compensate for the inconvenience, Patriot sent letters of apology to customers, as well as a Barbie doll or Hot Wheels toy and software, a package worth roughly $60. But
even Mr. Durst acknowledged: "It's the one time of year where it's more than just a late delivery. It's an emotional thing -- it's a gift for a child. We understand that."
The understanding will go only so far with consumers. Demand is exceeding companies' expectations at www .sears.ca [http://www.sears.ca/], www .hmv.com
[http://www.hmv.com/], www . futureshop .ca [http://www.futureshop.ca/] and other key E-retailers.
Toronto-based Chapters is scrambling to keep up with volume that is about 25 per cent higher than anticipated, Mr. Segal said. As a result, he's called out all the troops to the
warehouse, including executives.
He described the scene as "organized chaos" that touches on "pandemonium" at times. "Part of the problem that we have with the Internet is that we've hyped it so much that
customer expectations are almost unattainable."
He's personally manning the customer service telephone lines for two hours a day. One woman caller told Mr. Segal that she wanted to order a book at 2 a.m. and expected the 24hour delivery to have it at her house at 2 a.m. the next day.
That's not how it works, Mr. Segal explained. The 24-hour service simply means the book will be out of the warehouse in 24 hours. But the book still has to be delivered by Canada
Post, which can take another few days. Spelling out these delivery policies remains a big challenge, he said.
Another customer said she has yet to receive two tiny, hard-to-find children's books, worth about $10, that she ordered from www .chapters.ca [http://www.chapters.ca/] about 21/2
weeks ago. She received the E-mail from Mr. Segal this week promising her free upgraded delivery, and figures Chapters will end up spending more shipping the books than their
actual cost.
In a bid to avoid some of these E-snags, a number of big chains in Canada have simply stayed away from Internet -selling, at least for this Christmas.
Henry Birk & Sons Inc. looked into setting up a Web site, but wasn't able to find enough money and people to do the job properly, said president Thomas Andruskevich. Instead of
risking tarnishing its reputation with a weak Web site, Montreal-based Birks put the project on hold, he said.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

97/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

He pointed to research that has found that a dissatisfied Internet shopper is apt never to return to the culprit site, while a disgruntled bricks-and-mortar shopper may give the store
another try. "I think the whole on-line fulfilment and service side is an issue that will result in a lot of fallout this year."
Sears Canada Inc. will probably be immune to the fallout. It has benefited from an existing infrastructure already in place for its catalogue operation. The Toronto-based department
store chain offers almost no home delivery; rather, it ships on-line orders to one of its 2,000 catalogue outlets across the country -- something customers prefer because home delivery
often means having to go to the post office to pick up the parcel, said Sears vice-president Garry Smith.
Sears expects to ring up $20-million in on-line sales this year, 10 times what it brought in last year, Mr. Smith said, two-thirds of it in November and December.
On the other hand, Sears and other retailers generally don't expect to make any money from their Internet business this year.
Music chain HMV's on-line division will make a profit only "within two years," said Peter Luckhurst, president of HMV North America Ltd. These days he's more worried about filling
holiday orders, and is "dragging people down from the office" to keep goods flowing through the warehouse.
HMV went to the expense of setting up separate Web sites in Canada, Britain, Japan and Australia (with another coming to the United States next year). People prefer a domestic Eretailer, Mr. Luckhurst said, a phenomenon that has been backed up by research.
On-line companies will have to speed up their efforts to fix the problems or risk losing shoppers, they acknowledge. "The most important thing to me right now is that Canadians get a
positive Christmas experience with E-commerce," said Mr. Segal at Chapters.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvci01tl8

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

98/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Sports

Cyberspace represents gold mine for NHL, new owner believes Hockeynomics Part 2 of 3
DAVID SHOALTS
1666 words
7 October 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
S3
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

A look at the National Hockey League's bottom line
Rather than crying about rising player salaries, the National Hockey League should begin exploiting new revenue possibilities.
That's the view of one of the league's newest owners, Ted Leonsis, who parlayed an early stake in Internet giant America Online into enough money to buy the Washington Capitals
and a piece of the MCI Center and the Washington Wizards of the National Basketball Association.
Most NHL clubs are already developing new ways to make money, usually through new arenas and the increased ticket, advertising and luxury-box income they offer. There are also
innovative schemes, such as silent auctions, which have become significant moneymakers for teams such as the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Leonsis agrees with his fellow owners that salaries are getting out of hand. But at the same time, the NHL is in position to reap many economic rewards, he said.
"I'm very optimistic about hockey for five reasons," Leonsis said. "One, it's the most global of the four major [North American] sports. I don't think the global heart of it has been tapped,
and as distribution channels like the Internet get more global, that can be tapped.
"Second, the demographics for hockey are very strong. We're finding in our market that our [audience] is very upscale.
"Third, I think the Internet represents huge new revenue streams for teams in the coming years. The good news is that the NHL and its teams own their own Internet rights.
"Fourth, I think the NHL brands are undermarketed, and I'm accustomed to a world like AOL where you build the brand with every fibre.
"And last, I think the tension between the league and the NHL Players' Association is short-lived, and we can work together."
Leonsis isn't the only one who thinks the NHL does a relatively poor job of marketing itself. A recent survey by The Sports Business Journal of 300 executives at companies that
sponsor various sports asked which organizations were best at marketing their sport.
The NHL wound up 10th, with only 21.7 per cent of the respondents saying it does a good job. NASCAR, the stock-car racing association regarded as a group on the rise, was first with
100 per cent, followed by the NBA at 86.7 per cent.
One of the areas the NHL should begin working on, according to Bob Goodenow, executive director of the NHL Players' Association, is its U.S. television package. The Fox Network
gave up its contract after five years of declining ratings and now ABC-ESPN has an exclusive $600-million, five-year contract.
"The situation with Fox and the league was that they tried to experiment by moving games from Sunday to Saturday and back to Sunday," Goodenow said. "There was no regular
pattern. It's difficult getting a national audience like that."
What the league should do, Goodenow says, is work on developing one or two teams that fans across the United States can identify with.
"Hockey doesn't have a Dallas Cowboys or Chicago Bulls with significant fans from coast to coast that can be reflected in national ratings," he said. "I think now with ABC and ESPN
there's an ability to cross-promote and develop a more focused broadcast pattern."
Television revenue discussions always get around to pay TV. The NHL has a pay-TV package in the United States and recently launched one in Canada. But the culture of hockey on
free television is entrenched in Canada, where the market for pay TV is small. And south of the border, the appetite for hockey on pay TV is equally small.
"I think we've turned over every stone in our market," Vancouver Canucks general manager Brian Burke said of panning revenue streams. "Pay TV is a possibility in the future , but will
it solve our million-dollar losses? No. There's only four million people in British Columbia."
The global reach of the Internet , then, is the most intriguing possibility. Leonsis sees exploring the World Wide Web as more important than the traditional method of spending money
on free-agent players to improve the team and its ticket sales.
"We feel we can be competitive [on the ice]," Leonsis said. "So if it's a choice between a right winger and a world-class database and a Web site, we'll build the database and Web
site."
Along with the Capitals, Leonsis bought the Washington franchise of Ticketmaster from former owner Abe Pollin. He feels that can be combined with a Capitals Web site to build "a
global hockey portal which we can use to get into other things like ticketing and other sports."
The Capitals recently relaunched their Web site ( www .washingtoncaps.com [http://www.washingtoncaps.com/]), and in addition to the usual statistics and stories about the team, fans
can buy game tickets and team merchandise on-line. Eventually, Leonsis hopes to have a site that draws millions of visitors a day and attract big advertisers.
"I'm going to spend a lot of money establishing a one-to-one relationship with the fans and building a Web portal," he said. "I'm going to give all the players laptop computers with
access to the Internet . The players will be the stars.
"I've been at America Online for six years and seen it grow from 6,000 members to 18 million, so we have nowhere to go but up."
For the Maple Leafs and their corporate sibling, the Toronto Raptors of the NBA, silent auctions are speaking loudly when it comes to the bottom line.
Since the start of their 1997-98 seasons, the weekend games for both teams have allowed fans to submit written bids on merchandise from hats and sweaters to framed prints of
historic occasions such as the closing of Maple Leaf Gardens. Almost all of the items have been autographed by the sports stars who have worn the item or are on the print .
In the beginning, there was some internal disagreement in Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment, which owns both teams, over the purpose of the silent auctions. Questions had been
raised about people bidding on items in the belief a good portion or all of the proceeds were going to charity.
However, Maple Leaf Sports executives say raising money for the company, not charity, was always the motivating factor.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

99/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

"Auctions are an age-old way of doing business," said Jeff Newman, Maple Leaf's director of consumer products. "Auctions go on every day in every city, both silent and not so silent.
To assume with every silent auction the money goes to charity is wrong.
"We are in the business of making money for this wonderful facility and for the athletes who play in it. A silent auction is another means of transacting ourselves."
While Maple Leaf executives played down the notion, the auctions have turned into a significant moneymaker. One estimate has placed the take from sales at Leafs games as high as
$40,000 a week.
"It's okay, but in the grand scheme of things it's not what we would call a huge part of our merchandising," said Maple Leaf vice-president and project director Tom Anselmi, who also
said the company's prime motivation for the auctions was not to help charities. "We do it to make money."
Discussions with several fans at the silent-auction booth at a Maple Leafs game at the Air Canada Centre showed the enormous revenue potential of the auctions. None of the people
interviewed were under the impression this was a charitable venture.
"We don't care whose pockets the money goes in," said Jeff Schimp of White Lake, Mich., whose friend Tim White bid $300 on a framed picture of Detroit Red Wings captain Steve
Yzerman holding the Stanley Cup. "We like the exchange rate."
Some people were concerned that some items were not clearly marked with the information they were not one of a kind but one in a series.
"I had the impression these are one-ofs, but they're not," Morris McDowell of Brampton, Ont., said. "That could mislead a few people."
The auction has several booths -- one on each level of the Air Canada Centre. The booth visited by The Globe and Mail had 22 items up for bids, from a signed Tie Domi T-shirt and
baseball cap for a minimum bid of $50 to an autographed photograph of Muhammad Ali standing over prone Sonny Liston in a world boxing championship bout for a minimum bid of
$600.
The revenue potential is astonishing. One item could gross as much as $500,000 in one season.
For example, one popular item is a framed picture of the opening faceoff at the final game at Maple Leaf Gardens. The picture is signed by three of the participants. Three
commemorative coins are mounted in the frame.
The Maple Leafs commissioned 500 of the pictures and paid the principals to sign them. One went on sale each week at each booth at the Air Canada Centre, and the sale prices were
as high as $1,100.
Terry Busch of Cardiff, Ont., was looking at the print and said the booth attendant told him it went for $1,100 the previous week. "You say there's 500 of them and this one is No. 10,"
he said. "Well, the guy told me they got $1,100 for one last week. So they sell it and put up another one."
Maple Leaf Sports makes no apologies for the auctions, which are becoming common among professional sports teams. Company executives also say customers can count on their
products to be authentic in an industry rife with counterfeiting.
"Because of our access [to athletes], people can be sure what we sell is genuine," Anselmi said.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dva701fpz

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

100/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Net Worth

Last-minute E-shopping for Xmas This season a lot of folks are shopping in cyberspace for the first time. It's not too late to
join them. Here's a primer.
MARY GOODERHAM
2469 words
11 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B5
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

It was a feeling unlike any Donna McCabe had ever experienced in any store.
As a "newbie" on-line shopper surfing around a Canadian bookseller's Internet site, the 42-year-old Toronto secretary was elated to find a best-selling novel on her Christmas list that
had long ago sold out at most traditional bookstores. She quickly typed in her mailing and credit card information to complete the transaction, logged off her computer -- and then the
panic set in.
Call it E-buyer's remorse. For Ms. McCabe there were concerns ranging from the advisability of giving out her credit card on-line to whether she would ever see the coveted book.
"I said: 'Oh my God, what have I done?' " she said.
However, when she picked up the telephone and called the company's customer service department, she found that her order had been securely received and was already on its way
to being filled.
"Bang, it was out the door to me," she said. "It was dead easy; almost too easy."
Rather than fighting the crowds at the mall, many people like Ms. McCabe will have their first on-line shopping experience this holiday season, clicking and spending their money away
in dot.com stores. And merchants jockeying for position in the electronic economy are ready with ever-expanding Web sites, discount coupons, shipping deals and lots and lots of
advertisements promoting their businesses.
On-line holiday sales are predicted to triple this year to $9.5-billion worldwide, with an estimated 10 million E-tailing "newbies" trying it out for the first time.
If you're a relative newcomer, it's time to learn about the high points and hazards of on-line shopping, from finding the right shopping sites and getting the best deals to keeping your
personal and financial information secure, avoiding extra charges and making sure you get the goods before the all-important Christmas deadline.
"It's an education," said Jim Carroll, an Internet consultant and co-author of Selling Online : How to Be a Successful E-Commerce Merchant in Canada,adding that not only are many
consumers new to on-line shopping this season, many merchants are too, making for a tremendous learning curve.
With only 14 shopping days left until Christmas, there's no time to waste getting on-line. Most E-tailers say that orders made by Dec. 17 will surely get there before Santa. You can also
stipulate overnight delivery for a price. Here are some last-minute shopping tips. Where to look
Finding the sites is the first step in your on-line shopping spree.
One of the biggest pitfalls for Canadians, Mr. Carroll said, is that many of the most popular sites are in the United States, meaning that you will have to pay exchange, duty and
substantial shipping charges and maybe wait longer if you shop there.
But Mr. Carroll said Canadians are especially influenced by the barrage of advertising currently being done by U.S. megasites. If you look hard enough, he said, you can find homegrown equivalents. The most noteworthy applies to books, where instead of Amazon ( www .amazon.com [http://www.amazon.com/]), Canadians can shop at Chapters
( www .chapters.ca [http://www.chapters.ca/]) or Indigo ( www .indigo.com [http://www.indigo.com/]). But there are less obvious choices. For instance, anyone looking for lingerie can
shop at Canada's La Senza ( www .lasenza.com [http://www.lasenza.com/]) instead of U.S.-based Victoria's Secret ( www .victoriassecret.com [http://www.victoriassecret.com/]).
Several Canadian on-line directories have made it easier by grouping all of the 200 or so approved Canadian retailers in one spot, including Yahoo Canada Shopping at
( www .yahoo.ca [http://www.yahoo.ca/]) and the AltaVista Canada Shopping Guide at ( www .altavista.ca [http://www.altavista.ca/]).
"We're tying to make it easier for people," said Lesley Weldrake, associate brand manager at Yahoo Canada. "Canadians would prefer to deal in their own currency and not have to
deal with surprises when it comes to duty and shipping and brands they don't know."
A variation on the directory theme is ( www .northstarmall.ca [http://www.northstarmall.ca/]), which aims to become a major destination for on-line shoppers in Canada by creating a
virtual shopping centre where you can "visit" stores that sell products ranging from automotive to travel goods.
Comparison shopping
Comparing products and prices is increasingly possible on the Internet , although it is important to be specific about the name and model number of the product you are looking at.
There are increasing numbers of automated shopping agents or "bots" that act as inter-merchant search engines to compare prices for specific products. However, be forewarned that
many of the "bots" so far include only U.S. merchants and they can be biased, because many are hosted by sites that also sell products.
Regardless, Eric Yuzpe, a 27-year-old multimedia product developer in Toronto who plans to do most of his Christmas shopping on-line this year, said he regularly visits a site called
( www .bottomdollar.com [http://www.bottomdollar.com/]) to compare products, albeit armed with a calculator in order to convert and add extra costs between the U.S. and Canadian
stores. Is it secure?
Canadians also have lingering concerns about the security of the information used in on-line transactions, despite the fact that improved technologies are making on-line shopping safer
every day.
George Dereza, a liability analyst for an insurance company in Toronto, said he feels comfortable banking on-line but not shopping, because he feels the banks have more extensive
security systems to protect his financial information.
"I'm quite surprised by the number of people who don't give any second thought to it," he said. "I don't take anything at face value."
E-consumers should be careful about where and how they shop, although encryption technology is used by more and more sites and credit card companies provide protection against
unauthorized card use, theft or loss.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

101/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Visa Canada told clients in a recent mailing to be sure to check for the unbroken lock or key displayed in their browser when they shop, meaning that no one but they and the retailer
can view the payment information. If you require a password to enter an order, the notice said, keep it private and change it often.
Indeed, when you finish your on-line shopping trip and click on the buy button, you're taken to on-line forms that reside on the retailer's secure commerce server. Such servers usually
use encrypted protocols so that no plain-text version of your name, address, shipping address or credit card information travels the wires.
Don Thompson, a partner in the E-business section of Deloitte Consulting in Toronto, said companies such as Truste and WebTrust that focus on security and personal privacy issues
at merchant sites confer an extra degree of legitimacy to the merchant and confidence to the shopper. Their seals of approval, displayed by merchants, are awarded only if sites follow
rigorous privacy principles and agree to comply with the company's oversight and procedures to resolve disputes. Is it private?
Privacy is one of the first casualties of on-line shopping. Although most E-tailers have some form of privacy policy that covers the transmission of information about you to others, it
doesn't stop them from following you around when you're on their site.
Indeed, one of the reasons that prices are often so low is that you are paying the merchant in part with information about yourself for use in future marketing.
It can make shopping more convenient, as well. When you shop, "recommendation engines" on a growing number of sites collect profiles and allow the databases to suggest related
products to the ones you buy, based on your purchasing patterns or the buying habits of others. Finding bargains
'Tis the season to take advantage of the rush to capture the shopper.
Whether or not it's the best business model to ensure their long-term viability, on-line merchants are selling products at a tremendous discount and especially offering deals on
shipping, with many of them providing free delivery or express shipping at no extra charge.
"Take advantage of it," Mr. Carroll said. "There are a lot of people giving stuff away at a loss, so you can get some pretty good deals on-line."
Web merchants, like those in the real world, often offer rebates or coupons on products, which can usually be found in one central location and can be redeemed on-line by typing in a
promotional code when an item is ordered.
Buy used
Buying used, refurbished or end-of-line products can also lead to terrific bargains, although it's important to know in advance what you are getting in terms of warranties and
assurances that a product is as advertised.
When Danny McLean, 40, went looking for recording equipment and instruments to outfit a Toronto recording studio, he opted for vintage models offered on a series of auction sites
and saved money to boot.
"You have to know what you're looking for," he said. "If you don't, for sure you're going to have a bad experience." On-line credibility
There is always an element of risk when you are asked to pay for something before you receive it, so on-line shoppers have to do their homework.
Scrutinize a site for how it looks, how often it is updated and the quality of its layout and design, which are usually a reflection of how serious and organized the merchant is. Make sure
they provide information up front such as their address and policies regarding refunds and cancellations.
Check out a vendor by asking friends or colleagues or contacts you have made on the Web for their feedback and advice, and check out their reputation with consumer organizations.
There are a number of sites that rate merchants and products (although so far mostly in the United States) such as (bizrate.com), which surveys customers right at the point of
purchase and (deja.com),which has scores of message boards where consumers can comment on a wide range of items and issues.
Returns and other policies
Some merchants impose strict return and exchange policies, so make sure you read the find print well, print a copy of it to keep if you have questions or to bolster your case in a
dispute.
Many sites allow 30 to 60 days to return products, but might impose a much shorter deadline for certain items, such as computers or digital cameras. Some simply require that you
return the product with original packaging and accessories, while others will charge you a restocking fee of 15 per cent or more if you've opened the box.
Find out who pays the return postage if an item is defective or was sent in error; most merchants do pay it.
Some sites associated with brick-and-mortar stores, although not all, will let you take returns there, so find out if it's an option. Customer service
Mr. Yuzpe said he never buys anything on-line from a company that does not have its toll-free number listed for customer service and does not answer a call within a reasonable period
of time. "Why make life any more difficult for yourself by trying to track down someone who can help you?" he said.
Experts suggest that shoppers test the service performance of competing E-tailers by making an inquiry, for instance about how long a back-ordered item will take to be delivered, and
seeing how quick and efficient the response is. The last word -- shipping
Delivery is the Achilles heel of many of the on-line merchants. Determining shipping charges on-line can be a challenge, because buyers usually have to wait until they have nearly
finished their order before the amount is displayed -- sometimes right up until they enter their credit card number.
Best to look for merchants that put caps on shipping charges, consider combining orders to reduce costs, watch for extras such as nebulous "handling" fees, keep a copy of your order
and plan ahead so that you don't have to pay extra for speedier delivery.
Last-minute shoppers should make sure that the E-tailer can deliver on time or there will be disappointments from E-recipients come Christmas Day.
According to a report released this week by Jupiter Communications Inc. of New York, consumers are most concerned about the ability of Web merchants to deliver the goods, with
shoppers saying they would limit their on-line purchases to 10 per cent of their holiday shopping budgets because of that factor.
For really last-minute shoppers some retailers like Chapters and Indigo will send an on-line gift certificate to be redeemed anytime.
ON-LINE SHOPPING TIPS
On-line commerce can mean better selection, lower prices and the convenience of shopping in the wee hours of the morning in your pajamas. But before you turn into jolly old St.
Clickolas, consider the following tips:
-- Seek out Canadian E-tailers that offer similar products to the U.S. megasites, without the cost and hassle of exchange, duty and shipping issues.
-- Familiarize yourself by spending time surfing through Web businesses to get comfortable with the process as well as the merchandise.
-- Look for privacy and security policies and seals of approval from trusted organizations that offer some assurance that the merchant is legitimate and that your personal information
will be protected.
-- Seek out help when you have questions, using on-line customer support services as well as toll-free numbers to contact the retailer directly.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

102/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

-- Get a copy of your on-line order, the vendor's privacy policy and shipping and return procedures to bolster your case in a dispute.
-- Clip coupons, usually available in central locations on many Web sites, which can be redeemed on-line by typing in a promotional code when an item is ordered.
-- Read the fine text, including shipping and return policies, especially on U.S. orders, and follow your delivery through your tracking number, which is usually E-mailed to you within
minutes of your order.
-- Compare prices through special services and compare experiences with other shoppers by tapping into the growing number of sites that rate and comment on merchants and their
goods.
-- Look for used, end-of-line or refurbished products, and make sure they come with warranties and assurances that a product is as advertised.
-- Slight variations in product names and model numbers can slow down searches, so make sure you are specific.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvcb01scd

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

103/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

WEB WATCH : PLAY MONEY
Report on Business: Technology

You too can be a (virtual) millionaire The poor and anonymous can join the day-trading zeitgeist by playing pretend on stock
sites
DAVE EBNER
931 words
26 August 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T3
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

The dot-com revolution promises wild riches for anyone savvy enough to latch on to the latest hot technology stock and ride it straight to the nearest country club.
But there's a wee asterisk on this otherwise enticing opportunity: To join the ranks of the day-trading zeitgeist you have to have money to invest in the first place.
Supposing you don't have a large chunk of change to start a profitable career as a day trader, there's still a whack of play-pretend options on the Internet .
The Virtual Stock Exchange allows you to trade stocks on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the New York Stock Exchange, getting the hang of the basics of buying and selling stocks. You
start with $500,000 (U.S.), and there's a 20-minute delay on trades; but it gives you a good feel for the real thing.
To see just how talented you are, it offers public competitions involving any number of the site's visitors. To find out which one of your group of friends belongs on Bay Street, private
competitions are also available.
The exchange styles itself as a day-trading minor league. It offers a detailed "investment guide," featuring useful information and advice on bonds and mutual funds, among other fun
topics. Handy definitions -- such as "a derivative is a financial instrument that does not constitute ownership, but a promise to convey ownership" -- are just a click away.
There's also several message boards, which the exchange encourages its users to post on. Topics cover a range of industries, from insurance to transportation.
Like many sites, there's an obligatory poll, recently asking want-to-be millionaires what they think about the recent technology stock selloff. More than half of the 4,400 respondents see
it as a buying opportunity, a third see it as a short-term correction and the remaining minority, 15 per cent, believe it's time to get out.
The League of American Investors, a U.S. lobby group on Capitol Hill, promises a stock-market simulation that's "the most effective method to learn about the stock market and to
discover investment opportunities for your real dollar portfolio."
Most interesting is the site's Weston Manual, updated regularly, that has snapshots of U.S. companies on the move. Knowing that Worldwide PetroMoly Inc. manufactures, markets and
distributes high-performance lubricants for motor vehicles, compressor engines and trains before buying shares in the company puts you a step ahead of the investor buying simply
because the stock's going up.
Yes, it goes against one of day trading's golden rules -- it doesn't matter what the company does -- but in the end, you'll have a better bottom line if you do a little research.
Investment Challenge, aptly sponsored by Toronto-Dominion Bank's Green Line Investor Services, is geared toward Canadian and American students. Like American Investors, it
promises a lot: "We offer North America's most realistic stock market simulations. The only simulations providing live traders, all major exchanges, equities, options, margin accounts,
short-selling, real-time trading and more!"
The emphasis here, like other places, is on learning. Tutorials on short selling and "call and put" options help tomorrow's Bay Street titans get the hang of gambling.
The Web site, which has two student competitions a year as well as a public simulation in the summer, also gives aspiring traders access to the Toronto Stock Exchange, a rarity for
Web market games.
Developed in Toronto, the Oanda Currency Trading Game lets you into the world where the globe's real financial power brokers play. Currency trading, a speculative art, has broken the
back of several less-developed countries in recent years, but fret not, no economies get flushed down the toilet in Oanda's simulation. The site -- currently in beta testing and expected
to be fully completed in September -- is remarkably advanced, offering real-time data feeds, full graphing capabilities and market news .
"Are you up to the challenge of the Great Game?" is the question with which The Great Game greets visitors. Those with the courage to push forth are rewarded by a chance to play
with #10,000 and trade British equities on the London Stock Exchange. British Telecom, Rolls-Royce and United Biscuits are the big issues. But, like all these games, a line at the
bottom of the rules reminds you "the value of your portfolio has no monetary value."
Equities, bonds and the rest are not the only tradable commodities, at least on the wonderful expanse of the World Wide Web . Sports heroes, movie stars and celebrities of most
stripes can see their stocks go up and down on a variety of sites.
On the Rogue Market last week, Canadian filmmaker Atom Egoyan was the seventh most valuable star equity, closing at 881.16 after heavy trading. American Michael Milkin, the
famous junk bond trader of the 1980s, is not faring as well as our fair nation's leading auteur. His stock collapsed last week, falling 50 per cent to close at 266.14.
THE LINKS
Virtual Stock Exchange: www .virtualstockexchange.com [http://www.virtualstockexchange.com/]
League of American Investors: investorsleague.com/index.html
Investment Challenge: www .ichallenge.net [http://www.ichallenge.net/]
The Great Game: www .thegreatgame.com [http://www.thegreatgame.com/]
Currency Trading Game: www .oanda.com/ccgame.html [http://www.oanda.com/ccgame.html]
Rogue Market: www .roguemarket.com [http://www.roguemarket.com/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv8q018ia

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

104/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

The Jugheads at Archie Comics --- Company backs down in bid to wrestle veronica.org from a 2-year-old
The Toronto Star
1025 words
11 February 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
I love the smell of lawyers in the morning! That smell, you know? That lawyer smell? It smells like . . . victory. No, wait, it smells more like Veronica.
Ahem. Lawyers at Archie Comics - the Riverdale gang empire - decided to send the proverbial "threatening letter" to the dad of a 2-year-old named Veronica. Couple years ago, he
bought the domain name veronica.org for her. He thought she'd like it some day.
I've registered my own little girl's name (morgancampbell.com). At the time of this writing, we expect another baby in a few days. I'll register something for her, too.
My reasons are exactly like those Veronica's dad articulated - encourage involvement from the first moment a dawning consciousness grasps what the Net is.
Alas, astute Archie legal eagles - after only two years - discovered this crime. They said the corporate empire had trademarked "Veronica" - the black haired girl, who palled around with
blonde Betty.
They demanded veronica.org be given to them. Now.
There are thousands of these corporate bully stories out there. Most are never reported on because the target is frightened into submission.
The Archie gang had no such luck. They picked on the wrong guy. Baby Veronica's dad happens to work in the media - Hollywood - and knew how to fight back with a media campaign.
He rewrote the Web site to have Baby V wonder why lawyers were trying to steal her name. And he then contacted the world.
The public ridicule and disgust grew until Archie's reigning exec reined in the legal assault. He said he knew nothing of it and thought it terrible.
To be fair, with domain names going for various crazy prices (due to the artificial-scarcity of the current domain name system), there are lots of scammers out there hoping to cash in.
These cybersquatters register things like RebaMcIntire.com and then point it at sites featuring pornography. How do you defend that, unless you are also named Reba McIntire?
But now corporate America is attempting to own baby names. Perhaps we shall all someday pay royalties when we file birth certificates.
"Oh, look, darling! Disney Corp. is having a sale on `Donald.' That's 15 per cent off! Let's take it!"
NEW ERA: The biggest little news item in 1999 will probably be missed by most. Especially with all the endless hype from Wall Street, porn crusaders, etc.
It's this: At some point this year there'll be more non-Americans than Americans online . That's a watershed moment in Net history. The effects won't be immediate. But it signals a
powerful shift.
We have a historical precendent to draw upon. (The Net is clearly getting old, it increasingly abounds with precedents.) Somewhere in 1998, the legion of "early adopters" that once
controlled the agenda of cyberspace was diluted and marginalized by the flood of new users. (See next item.)
Mind you, almost every executive in the start-up Net sector heralds from this demographic block, so the influence is hardly gone - it's just moved from "Wired-cool" to "Wall Streetcash."
Ireland-based market researcher Nua Ltd. estimates there are right now 153.25 million Net users. (It must be very official, it has a decimal point.) That breaks down thusly:
Africa: 1.14 million.
Asia/Pacific: 26.55 million
Europe: 33.39 million.
Middle East: 0.78 million.
Canada & USA: 87.00 million.
South America: 4.50 million.
("Asia/Pacific" includes Australia and New Zealand. " Internet Users" are defined as people with Net access - not the more specific " Internet Account holder." Nua multiplies the latter
by three to get the number of Internet users. You can get more methodology data at www .nua.ie/surveys/ [http://www.nua.ie/surveys/] how_many_ online /index.html.)
That's Canada and the U.S., 87 million, rest of the world, about 66 million.
Estimates on Canadian users vary. But, assume there are 8 million. Then that becomes U.S., 79 million, rest of the world, 74 million. Only 5 million more non-Americans need apply . . .
and you ain't seen nothing yet.
COME HERE OFTEN? But it gets more interesting still. Even if "Canada & USA" maintain the lead, those new Canadians and Americans coming online are completely changing the
agenda of cyberspace. A new study from the Pew Research Centre says the ranks of Netizens (citizens of the Net) are swelling with every day folk. They aren't "early adopters."
Early adopters were defined as technofiles, computer-loving types who were a small part of the real world but a massive part of the online world. Studies indicated they were "younger,
college-educated, well-paid males." The endless influx of cyber-immigrants has changed the face of cyberspace.
It's not changing over night. But, Pew says, it looks more like "mainstream America." Netizens are now more middle-aged, more middle-income, more gender-balanced, less formally
educated.
For instance, 61 per cent of newbies aren't college grads, 23 per cent claim household incomes under $30,000 a year, and 52 per cent of new users are women. The random phone
survey of 3,184 adults Americans was conducted last November.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

105/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

NET NEWSIES: As a "competing medium" - the Net versus TV, radio, newspapers , etc. - things are also steadily changing. Pew also says users get news online . It reports 64 per
cent of users get weather online - weather easily being the top news interest online . In 1996, it was 47 per cent.
Some 42 per cent of Americans get local news online - it was 27 per cent in 1996. Election news also soared - over 11 million, up from 4 million in 1996. It demonstrates the massive
and mainstream changes the Net is undergoing are profound and probably enduring.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
WEB TUSSLE: Archie Comics argued that the Web site of Baby Veronica, at .veronica.org, violated its copyright.
Document tor0000020010830dv2b0019b

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

106/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Online and anonymous --- Total anonymity on the Net is an illusion. But is it a must for the Net's future? Is it even desirable?
K.K. Campbell
2387 words
30 September 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Like clockwork. Every fall, some student somewhere thinks he's found a way mask to his identity online . So he gets bold and sends off a mildly threatening "anonymous" e-mail to the
White House.
"And regardless what trick they used," says professor David Jones of McMaster University in Hamilton, "within 48 hours the U.S. Secret Service is in the kid's bedroom, pointing a gun
at his head, saying `Don't move,' while they search the place.
"Within 48 hours. Without fail."
Jones, a computer science prof and president of Electronic Frontier Canada ( www .efc.ca [http://www.efc.ca/]), a watchdog group, knows that online anonymity, in its purest form at
least, is an illusion.
With the right resources, and determination, Internet transmissions can usually be traced. The U.S. Secret Service can demand the logs and records of anyone - and it will.
That said, if you don't plan on threatening heads of state, a great degree of online anonymity is possible.
But within that more limited definition of anonymity, more and more online observers are asking whether protecting anonymity online is essential for the Net's development.
Some argue that anonymity merely encourages irresponsible types to do things they wouldn't normally do, including breaking the law by, for instance, committing hate crimes and
peddling kiddie porn.
Others argue that without online anonymity, this fledgling new medium will never reach its full potential, and that the rights of the vast majority of law-abiding citizens should not be
proscribed because of the actions of a few.
KINDNESS OF STRANGERS: In the pre-commercial Net era, when academia ruled, there was little anonymity. Users were registered under institution and name. But, from day one,
there'd been tension between using the Internet as a research tool and as a social tool.
Students quickly caught on to the latter. They didn't just discuss math, but their social interests and problems. And when those interests and problems got personal, many didn't like the
way their schools reacted.
So, in the early 1990s, the first "remailer" arose. Remailers are free services that hide your real e-mail address. They create pseudonym accounts for you. Your e-mail first goes to the
computer hosting the remailer. Your real name and e-mail address are replaced. Web-based e-mail systems, like Hotmail, act in a similar manner. (A list of remailer-like things is at
www .cs.berkeley.edu/~raph/remailer-list.html. [http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~raph/remailer-list.html.])
Thus, you can post to public newsgroups and mailing lists or private e-mail addresses without recipients knowing who you really are.
Many early Net pioneers objected to remailers. They felt it altered the co-operative nature of the academic environment. Accountability was key to discourse.
But, as humanity flooded in by the millions and the protective academic hierarchy lost its dominance, conflicts arose everywhere. There were now thousands of reasons to want to keep
some degree of anonymity online . For instance, there are some predatory types out there who want to know who you really are so they can contact you for anything from endless junk
mail to nuisance complaints to your employer because of an online disagreement.
The American Civil Liberties Union has regularly noted the many legitimate uses of remailers: Employees fear prospective employers are increasingly using the Net to do checking.
People wish to meet online , but don't want to get too close too soon. People in self-help groups tend to be wary of talking about their problems. Some people live in nations where
dissident opinions can mean jail.
However, anti-social personalities also liked remailers. They'd use them to barge into a discussion group of pet cats and start giving graphic descriptions of murdering the animals.
They'd break into cultural chat areas and spew out derogatory opinions on that culture. They'd enter women's forums and start ranting about Femi-Nazis. All presumably for the twisted
pleasure of watching people over-react.
A darker element went further. They realized they could target individuals for minor terror campaigns. Some sent death threats to people with certain-sounding last names. Women
were always susceptible to random sexual losers lurking online . And pedophiles were thrilled that teens loved cyberspace - and it was a boon to the kiddie porn picture trade.
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY: "There's been a huge increase in the child pornography trade," says detective inspector Bob Matthews, who heads Project P, formally known as the OPP's
Child Pornography Unit.
"And I attribute that directly to the Internet and the anonymity it provides these people. Today, almost every single one of our cases involves it."
Project P was formed in 1975. In 1993, legislation was enacted increasing the penalty for making, importing and distributing kiddie porn from two years to 10. It also became a crime to
just possess it (up to five years). In 1994, the Net became a household word and millions came online .
Before 1993, there were one or two child porn investigations a year. In 1999, at the time of writing, Project P has executed 57 search warrants, laid 73 charges, and conducted 63
investigations.
"We've more than doubled staff during the past year - up to 16 officers. We can go out on the Internet and find more cases than we can handle."
Some, however, have suggested Project P's expanding case load is because it's easier to catch people. The Net has resulted in more pedophiles behind bars, not fewer.
It's no secret law enforcement agencies dislike the anonymity the Net provides. In 1998, FBI director Louis Freeh appeared before a congressional committee to describe how FBI
agents are trained to visit chat areas and pose as 13- and 14-year-olds. He says they get about 70 "traveller" cases a year - instances where the adult asks a supposed 13-year-old to
meet in the real world.
(Earlier this month, Patrick Naughton, executive vice-president of products at Infoseek, which oversees Disney's Go Web site, was arrested. The 13-year-old girl he allegedly arranged
to meet on a pier in Santa Monica, Calif. turned out to be an adult FBI agent.)

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

107/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Freeh wants greater control of information on what users do online . He wants ISPs to keep longer logs of what users do, and, if possible, install Caller
ID on all its lines.
"That would be nice, if you could do it," Matthews says. "It would curtail activity immediately. But it's almost impossible to control the Internet ."
Jones calls the FBI suggestion "a perfect example of over-reacting. You're taking this powerfully emotional issue and suddenly tracking everyone in cyberspace.
"But I respect the point of view of Bob Matthews. There's a real crime, and the technology makes it harder to find out exactly who it is. On the other hand, I can't let the emotive nature
of child pornography obscure the fact that the caseload is small for the millions in Ontario. We can't turn a world-wide communications medium upside-down for that. I come down
completely on the side of anonymity."
Jones says Canadians currently send things through Canada Post without registering name or address.
"That means they can send drugs, bombs, death threats - yet we aren't asking to regulate the post. The notion that e-mail should be traceable is equally silly."
Austin Hill, president of Montreal-based Zero-Knowledge Systems, says anonymity helps children more than it hurts them. His company makes ID-hiding software.
"We have a population woefully untrained for speaking on the record," Hill says. "Most kids don't even realize they're speaking on the record when they post to public forums. We're
pushing our kids to get online but no one's warning them that publishing opinions online isn't like speaking their opinions at school. What you publish online can stay with you the
rest of your life."
Hill grew up online , but before the era of massive storage of everything. "And am I ever lucky! Teenagers say stupid things. I wasn't any different. I don't want to be reminded for the
rest of my life about some of those postings."
But teens today jump into an environment they don't understand - and aren't getting help from their parents, who often know less.
HATE CRIMES: The other common abuse of anonymity online is hate crime. Death threats, against groups or individuals, can be implicit or explicit.
The Jewish community takes it seriously.
"The argument from the groups like the American Civil Liberties Union is mainly `sticks and stones can break my bones but words will never hurt me,' " says Sol Littman of the
Canadian Simon Wiesenthal Centre.
"Well, our experience, in 2000 years of Jewish history, suggests hostile words are a prelude of hostile acts. We damn well take them seriously."
The Wiesenthal Centre ( www [http://www/].
wiesenthal.com) maintains something called Cyberwatch. It's dedicated to monitoring hate mongers online . It acknowledges that hate groups aren't new, but the Net has changed
what they can do. Peripheral groups can gain greater attention online that they do in other media. It's not only cheap, it provides anonymity and deniability.
"Witness the recent equivalent of a high-tech hate drive-by in Texas," Cyberwatch says on its site. "Someone broke into the electronic mail account of a professor and fired off a virulent
anti-black and anti-Semitic attack to 20,000 computer users in four states. The attack was authorized by the National Alliance, whose leader simply denied sending the message. Its
source was a convenient `anonymous I.D.' "
Cyberwatch says the Net provides "stealth technology for bigots, child pornographers and the like. Accountability, not anonymity, should be the operative principle."
Hate groups don't use anonymity as often as pedophiles.
"Hate-mongers are eager to advertise themselves," Littman says. "They're engaged in all kinds of minor competitions for leadership. They're easy to trace."
However, individuals have used anonymity when making death threats or launching "e-mail bombing" - sending so many e-mails to one person, it shuts down their service.
In the U.S., there have been two cases of individuals (Richard Machado and Kingman Quon) who sent out several dozen death threats to individuals of a particular ethnic group. Each
was tracked down and sent to jail.
Karen Mock, national director of the League for Human Rights of B'nai Brith Canada, doesn't believe anonymity, of itself, is a problem.
"Many ISPs have removed anonymous accounts not because the person dared to create a false account but because of the activities they were engaging in."
She doesn't believe there's any need for laws treating the Net differently than other media.
"If someone breaks the law, then they should pay the price. And the authorities should do whatever they are permitted to do to track down people hiding behind anonymity. Just like with
other media."
Mock says international money laundering is also a difficult crime to trace. But that doesn't mean enforcement people "should throw up their hands in resignation. They keep fighting."
Littman says he predicted all along that "an unregulated Internet would lead to copyright infringements, blackmail threats, spamming, all these things - and it's happened."
Littman was disappointed with the recent CRTC ruling that the Net didn't need special regulation - the laws of the land cover the crimes.
"That may be true, but it only means anything if our law enforcement agencies actually can enforce the laws on the Internet ." Littman says they need some help.
"There's a big difference between Bob Matthews and Sol Littman," Jones says. "Matthews is investigating real crimes. Littman is just following up things people say that he doesn't like.
That means finding where they are and who they are. He's been very successful at getting them silenced."
Jones refers to instances where Littman's lobbying has caused Canadian ISPs to pull the plug on individuals posting nasty, but not criminal, materials.
"For us, the focus has always been the provider," Littman says. "The ISP knows who it's dealing with because of the registration process. And they're usually willing to listen to
complaints."
Littman says the leadership in the Canadian Association of Internet Providers listens to social problems.
"That's opposed to the original ISPs, which were usually run by techies with no social intelligence and little more than a desire to build their businesses up so they could sell them to
Bell."
The police, ISPs and the public are more co-operative today, Littman says. And that's good for the Net, he adds.
But Jones says people who oppose anonymity are usually too narrowly focused on a few issues.
"They play the `kiddie porn card' over and over to make their case," Jones says. "Well, what about the `stalker card'? To me, one of the most persuasive arguments in support of
anonymity are women who've been abused by former mates. It's already almost impossible to hide. Get rid of the ability to disguise ID, and it will be impossible. Former abusers will

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

108/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

track you down through cyberspace."
Proponents of anonymity say that removing it will have unexpected results. Legislators must proceed carefully so as to not damage a blossoming social and commercial arena.
For instance, the state of Virginia is seeking to stop spammers by enacting legislation that prevents false identity online . The intention is good: Make spammers findable, so they can
be punished.
But it would then make everyone punishable for using a fake name or e-mail address online .
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
OPPOSING VIEWS: "I come down completely on the side of anonymity," says McMaster professor David Jones, above. But the OPP's Bob Matthews, far left, says almost every case of kid porn now
involves the Net. Sol Littman, left, was disappointed with a CRTC ruling that the Net doesn't need special regulation.
Document tor0000020010830dv9u00ypt

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

109/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Sports Business

Sports Illustrated launches sister magazine
SHAWNA RICHER
744 words
12 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
S2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Sports Illustrated's latest endeavour, just for women, hit newsstands yesterday with a breezy thunk, 120 pages influenced as much by its venerable brother as by traditional women's
magazines.
SI Women is a melange of magazines -- Sports Illustrated, Cosmopolitan and Teen People, with the advice, health and personal style sections of GQ, only written for women who like
sports.
The editorial mix is an easy balance -- one-third features on sporting events, athletes and photo essays, one-third personal service journalism targetting health (how to play through
your period) and nutrition (celebrity athletes tell how to get more protein in your diet) and one-third sports service columns intended to help readers play better and improve their skills
and fitness, including what to wear and where to train.
The content is lively and intended for women who like to compete for fun and want their fitness tips a little more Helen Gurley Brown than Joe Weider.
"Very definitely there is not a large group of women that want an endless procession of features about sports," editor Sandy Bailey said yesterday in an interview. She is also assistant
managing editor of Sports Illustrated and has been a reporter at The New York Times and Washington Post.
"This is not a book for people who just might be interested in the athletes themselves. Having said that, we're definitely not interested in simply doing a feature on the greatest new
bras."
The magazine promises solemn reportage on matters such as eating disorders and sexual harassment. But SI Women won't be staid. The bra will not be scorned.
Matter of fact, a college basketball team will put sports bras to the test in the May issue. That's not serious sports journalism , some may gasp in horror. Bailey knows this and isn't
apologizing. She is speaking to the generation of girls and women who are involved in sports for fun, who are thankful for the political battle waged to allow them to play, but who simply
want to get on with it.
"There's no one speaking to the girls who are playing just for fun," Bailey said. "Sports today has a different role for us. We are playing for the same reasons the boys do. And it's really
nice that we have reached a point where that is cool for girls like it is for boys to do it for fun. It's about time."
SI Women is targeted at women aged 16 to 34 and may fall short of the expectations of women who believe that sports journalism about women should be issue-based and
eternally serious or be mistaken for a step backward. Bailey believes fun doesn't mean flimsy.
A feature about the National Collegiate Athletic Association champion Tennessee Vols women's basketball team by SI college hoops writer Kelli Anderson and one on girls who play
high-school football in Georgia by SI correspondent Leigh Montville are excellent features that would stand up in Sports Illustrated. Anderson also checks in with a superb piece on
University of Texas runner Cindy Stefanko, who is suffering from cancer.
On the lighter side, this issue features columns on how to throw a punch, sports horoscopes, celebrity NCAA picks and how star athletes like their protein (Eric Lindros: two pieces of
French toast made with egg whites only). The only truly cringe-inducing page in the magazine, aside from the horoscopes, is the last one, a cheesy shot of nine National Football
League Pro Bowlers in swim trunks.
It will be interesting to see how SI Women sells in Canada with content that is entirely American and focusing on college and amateur athletics. The service journalism may help
peddle the 15,000 copies (at $4.50 an issue) that will be available in this country, of the magazine's total run of 450,000.
Bailey promised yesterday that news features on Canadians, particularly in areas such as hockey, will find a home in the magazine.
For women interested in the news , the new SI Women's World Wide Web site may be more up their alley. SI Women Online ( www .siforwomen.com [http://www.siforwomen.com/])
is accessible through the CNNSI.com home page and will feature the cover and select articles from each issue. It will also contain in-depth coverage of college basketball, women's
world cup soccer, the LPGA Tour and tennis.
Document glob000020010827dv3c00d8w

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

110/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

STOCK IN THE NEWS ANALYSIS
Report on Business: Money & Markets

Cinram may climb charts again As enthusiasm for MP3 deal wanes, some analysts still optimistic
KEITH McARTHUR
1008 words
23 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B14
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

It seemed like the perfect deal to boost Cinram International Inc.'s slumping stock price.
Early last month, the Toronto-based manufacturer of compact discs, video cassettes and digital video discs announced a partnership with MP3.com Inc. to sell tunes over the
Internet . The deal calls for Cinram to fulfill the orders and manufacture the CDs, and the order will be shipped to the customer within two days.
What better way to woo investors who worried that the company, which claims to be "manufacturing tomorrow's media today," had lost its edge?
Investors were previously concerned that Cinram -- a company that has been ahead of every new medium since the eight-track tape cassette -- had missed the Internet revolution .
MP3 technology allows people to download music from the Internet to a cheap blank CD. And while the quality of sound isn't as good as a store-bought CD, few listeners can tell the
difference.
The threat of San Diego-based MP3, and other on-line music companies, had almost halved Cinram's stock price prior to the MP3-Cinram deal. The stock had fallen from heights of
above $20 in January to $10.75 on the day before the deal was announced.
Cinram wanted to show that it wasn't ignoring the Internet . And if MP3 was willing to strike a deal, which included MP3 purchasing 1.5 million Cinram shares at above-market value,
why should other investors be worried?
"The fact that they wanted to invest in us shows their confidence in the physical product," Cinram chief financial officer Lewis Ritchie said yesterday.
The partnership calls for Cinram to fulfill the orders and manufacture the CDs.
On the day after the deal was announced, investors reacted positively, boosting the stock price as much as 16 per cent in intraday trading.
Then the stock resumed its slide, falling to as low as $8.85 last week.
"I was surprised that the stock came off after the deal," said analyst Glynn Williams at Newcrest Capital Inc.
Mr. Williams, who has covered Cinram for 13 years, has a "strong buy" rating on the stock. He thinks the stock is so undervalued that investors who lock in now will be able to double
their investment over the next 12 months.
"This is a tremendous buying opportunity for this stock," he said.
And investors have started to wake up.
The stock bounced last week after Nicholas Morton, an analyst with RBC Dominion Securities Inc., upgraded the stock to "outperform" from "neutral." It closed yesterday at $10.40,
down 10 cents, on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"At this price it is difficult to ignore," Mr. Morton wrote in his report.
He notes that Cinram is trading at just 31/2 times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). Zomax Inc., a Plymouth, Minn.-based company making
similar products, is trading at 20 times EBITDA.
Mr. Williams said Cinram's fundamentals are good -- maybe better than they were when the stock was trading above the $20 mark last January. He said Cinram is now past the
acquisitions it made in 1997 and its balance sheet is strong.
The real question for investors, then, is whether or not physical media like CDs and DVDs have met their Grim Reaper in the form of the Internet .
Analysts are divided.
Tim Casey of Nesbitt Burns and Ihor Danyliuk of Merrill Lynch & Co. remain bearish on Cinram stock. Both analysts maintained their "neutral" ratings after the MP3 deal was
announced.
And in his most recent research report, Mr. Morton writes that Cinram will never again enjoy the multiple at which it once traded. He said the Internet , satellite TV and expanded cable
offerings will eat into Cinram's revenue.
But that doesn't mean Cinram's in dire straits, Mr. Morton writes: "The reality is that the need for physical media will probably fall, but not disappear, in the foreseeable future ."
Newcrest's Glynn Williams is even less concerned about the Internet . He calls the buzz about digital downloading of music "overrated."
"Not too many people I know are going to give their loved ones at Christmas a homemade floppy disc, or the CD equivalent of that. It just won't cut it under the Christmas tree," he said.
He noted that sales of conventional CDs are up about 30 per cent this year.
"In the five- to 10-year time horizon, there might very well be digitally downloaded music of some consequence where it might represent between 10 and 20 per cent of the industry. But
the balance is going to grow through traditional channels of music retailers as well as Internet -delivered CDs, which is becoming explosive."
Cinram's Mr. Ritchie said the company firmly believes that physical media like CDs and DVDs are here to stay. Still, Cinram is taking new media quite seriously and will make more
announcements along the lines of the MP3 deal in the future , he said.
Bottom Line

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

111/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Alternative media for delivering music and films may eventually start eating into Cinram's revenue. But the company's fundamentals remain strong and the stock is trading at a serious
discount, some analysts say.
CINRAM INTERNATIONAL: VITAL STATISTICS
Business description: Manufactures prerecorded multimedia products. The company supplies prerecorded video cassettes, audio cassettes, CD-ROM, and DVD for motion picture
studios, music labels, publishers, and computer software companies worldwide. Head office: Toronto Telephone: 416-298-8190 Website : www .cinram.com [http://www.cinram.com/]
NYSE symbol: CRW Share values Trailing 12-month earnings per share..77cents
Trailing 12-month PE ratio
13.51
Annual dividend
8cents
Dividend yield
0.76%
52-week high
$20.50
52-week low
$8.85
Last close
$10.40
Change from previous
-10cents
1-year total return
-42.63%
59-month average annual return
10.60%
Source: Bloomberg Financial Services; Datastream, www .globeinvestor.com [http://www.globeinvestor.com/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvcn01upm

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

112/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

SHOWDOWN
Report on Business: Canadian

Broadcast signals subject of Web war Producers insist William Craig has no right give away their shows on the Internet
without their permission.
SUSANNE CRAIG

1549 words
11 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

William Craig has named his new Internet venture iCraveTV.com. However, angry broadcasters and producers say iStealTV.com is more appropriate, given that Mr. Craig is pulling in
television signals and giving them away without permission.
Two weeks ago, Toronto-based iCraveTV became the first company in the world to launch such a service. Simply log on to the company's Web site, click your mouse on any one of 17
channels on the iCraveTV menu, and a mini television screen begins playing the station of your choice.
On its first day of operation, iCraveTV logged 360,000 hits an hour. For the mathematically challenged, that's about 8.6 million hits a day. (A hit on a Web site is recorded when a
graphic element appears on a user's computer screen. It doesn't directly measure how many people have visited a particular site.)
The world, it would seem, is watching. And the stakes are huge in this dispute, which is shaping up to be one of the most-followed legal battles in broadcast history.
"These guys are used to an environment where a new idea shows up on the regulatory scope at least two to three years out. Then they have a long time to deal with it and adapt. In
our situation, we were on the air in 24 hours," said Mr. Craig, president of privately held iCraveTV. "That is the new world."
But broadcasters and producers say they don't want any part of Mr. Craig's world. The industry, which spent the better part of last week meeting with lawyers behind closed doors,
argues that Mr. Craig's venture is tantamount to theft. They have labelled him a pirate and say his actions violate both copyright and trademark laws.
Stay tuned for a flood of lawsuits against iCraveTV from corporate powerhouses such as CTV Inc. and Alliance Atlantis Communications Inc.
"It is our private property," said Michael MacMillan, chief executive officer of Alliance Atlantis, which sells the rights to shows like Traders and Power Play to broadcasters like Global
Television Network and CTV.
"We are going to take legal action. Soon."
Mr. Craig, a broadcast industry veteran with a long resume that includes stints at Rogers Communications Inc. and the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications
Commission, got the idea for his service in the early 1990s while working in Pittsburgh for Tele-Communications Inc.
Pittsburgh also happens to be the city that a guy named Mark Cuban calls home. Mr. Cuban, now a vice-president of Yahoo! Inc., made his mark developing an Internet site called
www .broadcast.com [http://www.broadcast.com/]. It is where Mr. Craig got his inspiration.
Mr. Cuban and pal Todd Wagner, alumni of Indiana University, once rigged a PC and a high-speed phone line in a bedroom of Mr. Cuban's home so they could follow the Hoosiers
college basketball team -- and www .broadcast.com [http://www.broadcast.com/] was born.
It's a vehicle now used by 488 radio and 65 television stations and cable networks to reach millions of Internet users. Yahoo! bought broadcast.com in July.
However, unlike iCraveTV, broadcast.com negotiates rights in advance to broadcast content.
"We work with our content providers to gain all the necessary rights and licences to broadcast their programming," said a spokeswoman for the company.
But this week at the Streaming Media West conference in San Jose, Calif., Mr. Cuban called U.S. digital copyright law the No. 1 enemy of on-line providers.
While Ottawa has made it clear it does not intend to regulate the Internet , the United States requires Webcasters to negotiate licensing fees with the recording industry, or face an
arbitration panel.
"Move your servers to Canada," Mr. Cuban said, saying Canada has taken a more friendly approach to the Internet .
Two weeks ago, Mr. Craig literally sprung his service on Canada's broadcasting industry. He has not paid one cent in royalties or arranged for Internet rights to the broadcasts.
"We are dealing with the Internet , where being first is key," said Mr. Craig.
"The end game is putting TV on the Internet . The broadcasters don't get it. They went right into reactive mode instead of trying to work with us."
Mr. Craig fashions himself as a legal distributer of TV signals, a sort of Rogers Cable of the Internet . However, the broadcasters say that because he hasn't paid for the signal or been
authorized to beam it up, he is no more than a cable pirate.
Glenn O'Farrell, national vice-president of legal and regulatory affairs for Global Television, says networks like Global have no problem with their signals being broadcast on the Web,
provided that the rights for distribution on the Internet have been secured.
Global is launching GlobalTV.com on Monday. It will offer users information about programming, as well as news about what's going on in their community. There will be some
programming, but in a different format than on TV. For example, Mr. O'Farrell said GlobalTV.com may broadcast news clips.
He said broadcasters are opposed to Mr. Craig's particular venture because it is both a trademark violation and a copyright infringement.
"We own the copyright to shows we produce and co-produce. As to programs we acquire, for which we pay for broadcasting rights, we pay for the right to broadcast," he said.
"Sure the Net is a reality, but we have to find a more orderly manner, rather than a disorderly manner, of making sure people who create content are not shortchanged in the process."
The issue of copyright infringement touches both producers and broadcasters. Broadcasters like Global own the copyright to shows they produce, such as the news .
And companies like Alliance Atlantis own the rights to shows they produce, such as Traders. Alliance Atlantis makes money by selling the exclusive rights to its shows to broadcasters.
Alliance Atlantis's Mr. MacMillan said the rights that broadcasters negotiate are very narrow, and in most cases do not include Internet rights.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

113/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

"The broadcasters acquired Canadian rights, and they did not acquire Internet rights. Even if they had, it would be their rights, but only for Canada," he said.
"Their signal is now received in Greece. They don't own those rights."
Mr. Craig says that although his site is on the World Wide Web , only Canadians are suppose to use it. To download a broadcast, a user has to enter his or her area code. Mr. Craig
says he has done this, not for legal reasons, but to ensure the site is not overwhelmed by users from around the world at the expense of Canadians. One day, he says, the service may
go global.
"Right now, if it is being picked up in Greece, it is being picked up fraudulently," said Mr. Craig. "Every system ever invented can be violated. It is absurd to focus on that."
The broadcasters and regulators say iCraveTV also owes them royalties or copyright fees for broadcasting their signals and shows. So far, Mr. Craig hasn't ponied up any money to
broadcast his service as required under the Canadian Copyright Act.
Mr. Craig said that while he intends to pay, the law doesn't require payment up front. "We are saying to the producers and broadcasters, we want to pay what is fair. We will pay money;
let's figure out how to do it," he said.
"When radio first started and they started playing back records on radio, it was uncharted territory because they didn't get the rights to do that. When cable first started, for the first 30
years, they didn't pay copyright fees. You don't just slam on the breaks on technological development because it doesn't fit the old norms."
This doesn't wash with the broadcasters and producers.
"I find it disingenuous that he is offering payment now. You don't just take something and then say 'I had every intention of paying for it,' " Mr. Farrell said.
Mr. Craig's legal troubles with the networks don't end there. The broadcasters say iCraveTV also represents a trademark infringement.
"CTV owns the trademark to CTV. Global owns theirs," said Michael McCabe, president of the Canadian Association of Broadcasters.
"People can not take other people's property and use it. There may be a Wild West period as all this develops, but eventually there will be copyright law that is clear."
In the meantime, the entire industry will be watching to see what happens next.
Eric Rothschild, a communications industry consultant and president of Rothschild & Co. of Toronto, said the outcome could forever change the way we view TV.
"People aren't that interested today because of the technical limitations. The video, for example, is jerky. But things aren't going to be that way forever -- far from it," he said.
"And over the next few years, as the technology evolves to allow ever-improving quality of video and of sound on the Internet , the issue of 'How do I protect my rights?' will take on
ever more importance."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvcb01s88

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

114/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Speed merchants --- With Bell's DSL service joining cable in the high-speed Internet sweeps, the end could finally be in sight
for the World Wide Wait.
Jeff Evans
2569 words
29 April 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Time. There never seems to be enough of it, in a world that may not know where it's headed, but is always in a big hurry anyway. The last thing most of us want is to be kept waiting. So
it always comes as a shock and an annoyance to find ourselves once again logged on to the Internet and . . . waiting for something to happen.
"Waiting to connect . . .," "waiting for reply," "downloading."
The helpful little messages that sometimes appear in a browser screen, declaring so many kilobytes downloaded, such a percentage of the file transferred, so many seconds left til
we're done, don't really sweeten the bitter pill of waiting.
Why is the much-hyped info-highway so often in a state of gridlock? The answer, as we'll see, isn't simple, but for a few dollars more, there is now an increasing range of high-speed
Internet access options that really do speed up Web surfing to an impressive extent.
Specifically, the telephone and cable companies are duking it out to own the market for fast, "high-bandwidth" Internet service to the home.
Which is better: Cable modem, or digital subscriber line (DSL) technology? Or, instead, would it be better to simply stick to cheaper and slower old technology until the dust settles?
END OF WORLD WIDE WAIT? For the average home or school Internet user, the culprit behind slow Internet performance is the traditional computer modem, connected to a
regular plain old telephone service (POTS) line. The original acoustic coupler modems of the early '80s were limited to about 300 bits per second of data transmission (eight bits of
electronic data are used to define one single letter or number), and sent or received information slower than an average person could type.
The current state of the art analogue modem can send data at up to 33,600 bits per second (or 33 kilobits per second), and can download information at nearly 56,000 bps (56 kbps) under ideal conditions. Conditions, on the Internet or anywhere else, are rarely ideal.
As the "content" on the Internet becomes more ambitious or demanding (such as 35-megabyte Star Wars movie trailers, or online 3D games with stereo sound), a 56 kbps modem
becomes a slow boat to cyberspace.
There's a real limit to the improvements in speed possible using ordinary modems and phone lines. What's needed is a "fatter pipe" to shoot electrons back and forth between your
home and the rest of the wired world.
WHO OWNS THE PIPES? Almost every Canadian home has three sets of wires already feeding some kind of electrical signal or energy in and out: phone, cable TV and electrical
power lines. Although there is actually some very interesting Internet technology which piggybacks data over home electric power lines, it's very questionable whether power utilities
want to or can acquire the expertise to go into the Internet service business on a large scale.
That leaves the phone companies and cable TV companies to compete over who gets to offer high-speed Internet service to the country's 12 million or so homes.
ROGERS WAVE: THE PIONEER: Perhaps because adding Internet service to its cable TV offerings represented a major untapped business opportunity, Canada's cable networks
were the first to move, while the phone companies adopted a wait and see attitude toward fat pipes to the home.
More than three years ago, cable jumped into the ring, with the Rogers Wave Internet cable modem service. By chance, one of the first test sites in Canada was in Newmarket, just
north of Toronto, where I live. I signed up for the Wave, and watched as two service technicians came to my home, opened up my IPC Pentium computer, put in an Ethernet network
card, and hung a Zenith cable modem off it. After a couple of hours of fiddling and tweaking, they had it going, and I sat down to sample the Net at "up to 500,000 bits per second."
In practice, the best that I ever got was "only" about 350,000 bits of data downloading per second. That was about 12 times faster than I'd ever achieved with my then-state-of-the-art
US Robotics 28.8 kbps modem.
There were lots of bugs with the early version of the Wave. It crashed my computer frequently, the service sometimes cut out for hours at a time, some Internet features like IRC chat
didn't work. But, I learned the basic lesson of high bandwidth addiction - once you have a fast Internet hookup, it's just too painful to go back to one-twelfth the speed. So, I hung in
with the Wave, gritting my teeth as I paid $40 per month, and pleasantly surprised as Rogers got most of the bugs out of the system.
I was encouraged in my patience by the knowledge that every other Internet connection I used (in the college where I taught part time, on my office network, and on my CompuServe
account on the old modem) also had their share of bugs and hiccups. None of them could match the speed of the Wave. I was a happy high-speed hostage.
When the 500,000 bps (500 kbps) Wave service was upgraded to the next generation of 1,000,000 bps (1 megabit per second, or mbps) @Home cable modem service, I was happy
for the chance to soak up the extra speed.
ENTER DSL: Then, in 1998, various telephone companies across the country stepped up to the plate with high-speed Internet service over regular phone lines. DSL, as it is termed,
offers a similar installation process to the cable service. I called the Sympatico number listed in the Toronto phone book at the end of March, and the installation was scheduled for
about a week later.
An independent installation technician pulled up to my home in a black Mercedes (I guess high bandwidth Internet installing pays well). He looked at the two Windows PCs I offered
him as test beds for the DSL hookup. One was the IPC Pentium from my original Wave installation, while the other was a borrowed top-of-line Compaq Presario 5660, with a 450MHz
Pentium II processor and 128MB of RAM.
The technician installed the Sympatico high speed software on both computers (the IPC had an old no-name 10 megabit Ethernet card already in it, while the Compaq had an
integrated 10/100 Ethernet port built in). He explained that I could simply plug the Motorola DSL modem into either computer, and after a maximum of 30 minutes, the DSL server would
detect the identity of the different computer, and automatically reconnect it to the network.
The DSL installation went very smoothly, taking about 25 minutes to do both computers. For comparison, my wife's new 450MHz Dell computer was connected to the Rogers service. I
was ready to do some digital drag-racing.
TESTING, 1, 2, 3: At this point, I would like to say I conducted scientific tests of cable modem vs. DSL, but I really can't. The more I investigated, the more variables I encountered.
Internet access speed varies according to a number of variables:

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

115/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The hardware and software on the computer you use.
The model of cable or DSL modem attached to your PC (there are at least three types of cable modem, with radically different performance, which Rogers has deployed in Newmarket
alone).
The capacity of the server and switching equipment handling your Internet service.
The number of other local users also accessing the local server.
The general amount of activity on the Internet .
The specific level of activity on Web sites you are trying to access at any given moment.
Sunspot activity, and many other unpredictable or unknowable factors.
However, after about 10 days of tests, the best I can say about cable vs. DSL is . . . they're different.
Overall, the Sympatico DSL service is, currently, definitely, faster than the Rogers @Home service in Newmarket, and Sympatico seems to offer somewhat more consistent
performance.
On my basic high-speed milestone, which was downloading the Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace trailer from the official Star Wars Web site, the Sympatico service regularly
attained over 1 mbps in download speed. The best I ever got from the Rogers connection was about half of that.
More commonly, however, download speeds of the two services were much closer together and much lower, and the Rogers system was sometimes actually faster, particularly late at
night.
Once one ventures out into the wild vastness of the Web, bandwidth can vary suddenly from a megabit per second, to a few hundred bits per second - the global Internet is a
bandwidth patchwork, no matter how fast your local part of it may be.
The inconsistencies can also be partly attributed to some inherent features of cable or DSL systems. For one thing, cable modem subscribers in a local neighbourhood share bandwidth
with each other - if a bunch of @Home users are all online at the same time, there can be a slowing down of the service, due to competition for bandwidth on the cable line, as well as
competition for the resources of the server all the subscribers are connected to.
Also, the cable modem in my home installation is the original, slowest, now obsolete model. Rogers is in the process of replacing the old modems with newer, faster ones.
The Sympatico DSL modem was a recent Motorola model.
LEAPFROG EFFECT: In other parts of the Greater Toronto Region, such as Richmond Hill just south of where I live, cable modem service runs faster, because the service provider
there, Shaw Cable, has invested over $200 million in the past five years in upgrading its network technology across Canada. Shaw uses different, faster cable modems than Rogers,
and when I toured the Shaw data centre in Richmond Hill recently, it looked more like a major corporate computer centre than an old-style cable TV studio.
As impressive as both Shaw Cable and Sympatico's offerings in the Toronto region are, BC Tel on the left coast has them both beat. BC Tel is perhaps the most aggressive and
innovative utility in the country when it comes to offering the latest in Internet services.
Its DSL service offers up to a sizzling 4 mbps transmission speed, several times that of the Toronto Sympatico service.
The point is, consumers can expect to see high speed Internet services constantly jostling for the title of fastest, as they invest in the latest technology and offer continually improving
services.
RAVE REVIEWS: I must admit that I was very, very impressed by my new Sympatico DSL service. I asked around for opinions from other recent subscribers, and got consistent rave
reviews.
Paul Rivoche, a Toronto artist and illustrator said, "I just got a fast (Macintosh) G3 computer, and the Sympatico service just completed the picture: it's great."
A journalistic colleague in downtown Toronto made the switch from Rogers to Sympatico a few months ago, and was initially very impressed. However, for him the sparkle of the new
technology wore off somewhat when there was a series of Sympatico service disruptions, some lasting for nearly a day.
I noticed a couple of occasions when I couldn't connect on Sympatico, just as there are occasions with Rogers when connection to the Internet is slow or unavailable. In some cases,
shutting down and restarting the PC seems to work, indicating a conflict with hardware or software on my computer.
In other cases, it turns out that the system is down for "routine"maintenance or technical trouble.
CABLE STRIKES BACK: I have decided to keep my Sympatico DSL for at least a few months, while my wife continues to use Rogers' service on her PC. DSL seems to have a speed
edge in some respects, but cable retains some ongoing advantages.
One of the most basic is . . . television. Shaw cable, in particular, is energetically offering digital video and digital audio services in the Toronto region, along with its regular Internet
and cable TV services.
Digital video and audio, especially when experienced on a good quality TV set and sound system, is far clearer and higher quality than regular VHS tape, broadcast, or cable image
and sound.
Shaw is also planning to offer a "voice over IP ( Internet Protocol)" service that will allow it to provide attractively priced long-distance phone service.
When it first rolled out its Wave service, Rogers claimed the cable modem technology would support up to 30 mbps transmission rates to the home. If true, Rogers may have the ability
to leapfrog the Sympatico service, if it is as willing as Shaw to spend the bucks to upgrade its cable modem service.
In the meantime, the consumer has to see which bit of the bandwidth patchwork is available in his or her neighborhood, to find out which local high-speed service offers the best value.
OTHER PLAYERS: In the background, there are many other potential players in the high-speed home Internet service game. ExpressVu and Star Choice, the two licensed Direct to
Home (DTH) satellite TV services, have introduced high-quality digital TV services to hundreds of thousands of Canadian households. Both companies are very interested in being
able to provide a degree of two-way interactivity to satellite service - an early attempt at this, the DirecPC service, was a failure, due to high cost and relatively low appeal to
consumers.
High-speed wireless Internet service is also being explored, as it offers some potential advantages over the vast wired infrastructure required for cable or DSL.
Microsoft is pushing ahead with strategic alliances with telecommunications companies, to promote high-speed Internet services. Microsoft also owns the Web TV set-top box
Internet service, which it hopes to promote as an alternative to traditional PC-based access.
BOTTOM LINE: For the consumer, home Internet service is dividing into at least a two-tier, economically segregated system. At the high end, for $40 or so per month (plus installation
charges, and in some cases, a rental or purchase fee for the high speed modem), you can have unlimited-use, ever faster, increasingly reliable DSL or cable Internet service with
maximum transmission speeds from 500,000 to several million bits per second.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

116/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

At about $20 per month, you can have unlimited-use access to a POTS service with up to 56 kbps transmission.
For as little as $9 per month (or in the case of a local freenet service, for virtually no cost beyond your basic phone service), you can have limited access to the Internet .
As with everything else related to the Internet , the high-bandwidth service picture is changing almost daily. Right now, DSL has the edge in some respects, in some places. But cable,
which has a healthy head start, won't sit on its laurels.
Expect a game of high-stakes, high-tech leapfrog for the foreseeable future .
--Freelance writer Jeff Evans can be reached at jeff@kcsl.ca.
xxxx LEADIN WORDS: xxxxx xxxxxx cutline words here.
Document tor0000020010830dv4t00anc

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

117/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Whither the Web? inventor wonders --- Business has stunted the Net's potential to democratize society, says Berners-Lee
The Toronto Star
1003 words
27 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
As we reported a few weeks back, Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web , was in Toronto to speak at the 8th World Wide Web Conference.
There was no shortage of coverage by the Canadian media. But, to my mind at least, one of his central messages was consistently missed: What the Web is and what it should evolve
into.
Part of the reason for that was the way Berners-Lee speaks. Each sentence is a rapid, staccato blast of ideas. He joked it was "too much coffee."
No way. I think he's been working so long in hypertext, he even speaks in it! He's living hypertext, holding 15 different conversations at once in the course of a sentence.
But, as Tim clicks his way through sentences, he extemporaneously spins out bon mots that reveal his epistemological gospel - gospel which underwrites the entire global project.
The Web is a human project, not a commercial project. The original idea is human and social - shared knowledge and increased social efficiency.
(It could, thus, never have been created by business because business does not share knowledge as a matter of simple existence. Knowledge hoarding creates an artificial scarcity,
and scarcity leads to higher margins.)
True, the Web's being contorted into unexpected shapes by the business community, which is throwing billions of dollars at it - but its underlying value hasn't changed a bit.
That's why, for instance, Berners-Lee boldly stated in his keynote that he rejects efforts to slap legal patents on the process-guts of the Web.
"The logic of patents is that if times get tough for your business, you can make money suing people."
He says patents cause Web developers to live in fear, uncertainty and doubt, and calls them "antithetical" to the Web's history.
But his most (deliberately) provocative ideas are ones which didn't seem to resonate in the mainstream press - his idea of the "Collaborative Web" and the "Semantic Web." They aren't
covered largely because you can't explain them in 15 seconds. Fortunately, Net.column gives me 25 seconds! So here goes . . .
QUESTION OF DEMOCRACY: The last question from the audience was from a man expressing his disappointment at the conference's lack of a single paper discussing the power of
the Web to increase democracy. Democratic empowerment through the decentralized Net has been touted since the beginning.
Berners-Lee shared the questioner's disappointment.
"Where are the papers in this conference on collaborative documents? Is there a different conference going on somewhere? I don't have people sending me beta versions of great Web
collaborative programs."
Ten years ago, the Web browser was viewed as something that let you read and write. You weren't supposed to be a silent consumer of Web pages. The W3C, which Berners-Lee
heads, thought this idea would move forward on its own. So it waited. And waited. And nothing has come.
"Finally, we said, `Forget it!"' Berners-Lee told the packed house. So it has now resolved to find out what the delay is.
There are underlying architecture problems - like saving changes to a document so your own alterations are not lost, and servers that accept PUT as well as GET. But the current
"static outpost" use of the Web is also driven by business - which wants you to buy their product and otherwise shut up.
(Check out the W3C editor/browser Amaya at www .w3.org. [http://www.w3.org./])
Berners-Lee's entire answer to this question about "democracy" dealt with "collaborative document editing."
I thought it fascinating. It brought me "back home" to why I started in this whole thing back in 1991.
THE POLITICS OF SEARCH ENGINES: The Web's biggest problem is that it's so big. We've all queried search engines and gotten back thousands of useless links. And many links we
do want aren't included. Under it's current system, search engines don't understand what we are asking.
Berners-Lee says the engine of the future will combine a reasoning engine with a search engine. He calls this the "Semantic Web." This will change "the Web of today to a Web in
which machine reasoning will be ubiquitous and devastatingly powerful."
Semantics is about the relationships of words. The word associations we all hold. Berners-Lee's concept is that there will be independent "dictionaries of meaning" that will help our
machines better understand what we ask.
He's not talking about "artificial intelligence" - when machines behave like people. The Semantic Web wants to develop languages for expressing info in a machine processable form.
A narrow example is the car buyer. You want a red car. Well, a for sale description for a scarlet car would be missed. The Semantic Web, however, would put those two people together.
Berners-Lee says developers need to get into people's minds so they could read the "dictionaries in their heads." This will help bring people together across cultures.
It sure could.
But it could do a few other things, too. All language is political. It's laden with subtext and unspoken implications (read George Orwell's 1946 essay "Politics and the English
Language").
Define red. Great. Now define democracy. God. Liberty. Socialism. Profit.
The technical complexity of the Web permits manipulations of meaning that are not apparent to the user. Search engine redirection is already common place, as corporations "buy"
search words so that you are directed to them and not their rivals.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

118/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The Semantic Web begs the question: Who writes the dictionary?
Nobody from the W3C answered that.
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
MANY FACES: Tim Berners-Lee, the Father of the Web, has been working with hypertext for so long, columnist K.K. Campbell says he even speaks like it.
Document tor0000020010830dv5r00ggu

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

119/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Is Big Brother watching us?
The Toronto Star
969 words
15 July 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
Y'all know about cookies, right?
Effectively, a cookie is a little "tracking device." It's like those old nature shows that had people shooting a tranq dart into an elephant's butt, knocking it out long enough for a tracking
bug to be stuck on it. Then the animal could be monitored as it wandered the wilds.
Cookies were initially designed to track "Web site traffic." All your mouse clicks could be saved up, showing where you wandered in a site. They can also deny access to certain areas.
(Check out www .illuminatus.com/cookie.fcgi [http://www.illuminatus.com/cookie.fcgi] for more. And try www .junkbusters.com. [http://www.junkbusters.com./])
Go look inside your own hard drive. Windows users, look in C:\Windows\Cookies. Mac users, try looking in the preferences folder. See how many times you've had your butt tagged.
(Feel free to wipe those little files out if you wish. It won't do any real harm, other than erase some Web site auto-logins and maybe a shopping cart or two.)
Companies that use cookies have always said there's no threat because their own little cookie has no way of knowing what other cookies are in there. And that's true. The "cookie
threat" is often sensationalized by the news media .
However, privacy organizations have continually warned that one type of company can collect up information across many Web sites: the Web ad folks, like DoubleClick, in New York
City.
Web ad companies place banners on many sites and those ads are served from the Web ad company's computers. Thus, they can see who's downloading ads from which site. In other
words, who is visiting what. DoubleClick has a network of more than 1,300 Web sites. They can track you. And they have a direct economic interest in doing it.
Privacy advocates have warned for years that the Info Age "Big Brother" is more likely to emerge from Big Business than Big Government. That's why Industry Canada Minister John
Manley is under pressure to give Canadians privacy protection from the private sector (Bill C54) to match protections it has from the public sector.
Privacy groups have become even more concerned as the online and offline consumer profiling industry is merging in a big way.
DoubleClick plans to absorb Colorado-based Abacus Direct Corp., a company that collects up consumer buying info in the offline world. Abacus databases hold decades worth of
catalogue purchases - 2.9 billion transactions, in fact. It has details on 80 million American households. It monitors 1,100 merchant catalogues.
Incidentally, this kind of merger is increasingly common. Publicly-traded Internet companies - like DoubleClick - have such inflated stock prices that they're trying to use that bloat to
buy offline companies through stock swaps.
DoubleClick stock opened in February, 1998, at $8.50. Last I checked, it was at $100. It has traded as high as $171. If the merger works and the Internet stock bubble bursts, at least
DoubleClick will have this real world asset - the Abacus database and 1,100 catalogue clients. Oh yeah, and something else called profitability. Unlike these wunderkind Internet
companies that lose-lose-lose money, Abacus retained earnings of $11.4 million last year (DoubleClick lost $18.1 million).
There's been talk of AOL buying CBS. Same rational.
Whatever the financial reasons for the merger, it means that DoubleClick will have a wealth of information on consumers that's been collected up over decades. If the two worlds can
successfully be brought together, DoubleClick will not only know what kinds of sites you visit, but what kinds of catalogue purchases you have made and when you made them.
It can then design ad campaigns around your previous purchasing behaviour. If it knows you buy gardening products every spring, it will serve up Web ads for gardening sites in April. If
it knows you have school-aged kids, it will serve up back-to-school ads in August and September. If it knows you recently purchased a computer with a DVD, it will serve up ads about
DVD products. You will have a permanent file because studies show that previous purchasing behaviour is a strong indicator of future purchasing behaviour.
All that said, remember it's not easy to match up the two worlds. You have to be identified in cyberspace. And, if people use products like Zero Knowledge ( www .zeroknowledge.com
[http://www.zeroknowledge.com/]) which scrambles your ID online , it will only be possible if they can entice you to volunteer personal data through schemes and rewards.
But, you do have to divulge some financial and shipping address data when you buy online . And that's probably the nexus point for making this a reality.
Privacy advocates are considering filing a complaint with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission. On June 29, Junkbusters Corp., Electronic Privacy Information Centre, Privacy
International, and several other organizations, sent an open letter to Abacus stockholders urging them to vote against the merger. Copies were forwarded to select members of U.S.
Congess and the Federal Trade Commission.
If they can't kill the deal, they at least want the government to enforce compliance with regulations that would only allow this kind of consumer profiling if the individual gives express
approval.
"This merger is the most dangerous assault against anonymity on the Internet since the Intel Processor Serial Number," says Junkbusters President Jason Catlett.
"By synchronizing cookies with name and address from e-mail, registrations and e-commerce transactions, the merged company would have a surveillance database of Orwellian
proportions."
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
xxxxx xxxxxxxx: xxx xxxxxxxx Web sites like CitySearch will be the successfule-commerce model of the .
Document tor0000020010830dv7f00mlx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

120/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

DIGITAL SURVIVOR
Report on Business: Managing

How to keep tabs on the competition
JIM CARROLL
664 words
27 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B6
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

People involved in the wired economy like to joke that the business world is starting to operate at " Internet time." Things are moving so quickly on-line that six months in Internet time
is like 20 years in real time.
As quirky as that may seem, it hardly stretches the imagination to realize the world has changed . The emergence of Internet -based business models, rapid product development and
new forms of competition mean that no business can afford to be complacent.
So it's important that people can perform some type of on-line monitoring of their business environment. To avoid being blindsided by developments, you should be prepared to track
what your competition is doing, assess the changes in your industry and monitor how other actions may affect you. The Internet is a rich resource for undertaking these activities.
One of the most useful, yet least known tools to keep up on changes is Mind-it (mindit.netmind.com). This free service allows you to set up a number of "minders" that notify you by Email when particular Web pages are changed or updated.
It's a simple but powerful concept: You simply track your competitors' pages on "what's new," products or other topics. Because you are advised as soon as new information appears,
you can put in place a simple monitoring method to stay on top of what the competition is doing.
Keeping an eye on new developments among rivals or within your industry can also be accomplished by tracking media releases or news articles. There are all kinds of options to
monitor releases -- for example, you can sign up for "Hot Off the Wire" from Canadian Corporate News (www2.cdn- news .com/hotw) or other similar services.
Once you've signed up, you will automatically receive E-mail messages containing the press releases of the companies you choose. You should also check out NewsPage, an
extremely flexible service that lets you follow news stories and press releases from multiple sources ( www .newspage.com [http://www.newspage.com/]).
NewsPage has organized information into about 1,400 categories, so you can focus in on selected topics. You can receive new information via E-mail, the Web or both.
Don't restrict yourself to these services. Keep in mind that an extremely important source of regular competitive and industry information will be local or national newspapers and
magazines, as well as industry trade publications.
Start out at JournalismNet, which contains an extensive list of on-line publications, to figure out which ones you want to track ( www .journalismnet.com
[http://www.journalismnet.com/]). Then examine which of these publications lets you do an on-line search of their archives, usually for a seven-day period or so.
If you revisit them on a weekly or biweekly basis to do a search for any articles on the company or industry you are monitoring, you've got another tool in place.
You can even make this process automatic, to a degree. Visit the Web site of this newspaper , for example, and do a search for the name of competitors. A list of matching news
articles from the past week will appear -- then bookmark the page. Revisit this bookmark every seven days for an instant list of all of relevant articles that have appeared recently.
If you are serious about this type of tracking, be aware that there are more elaborate fee-based services. The Dow Jones Interactive Custom Clips service is an example of the type of
sophisticated tool that is available -- you can use it to develop advanced monitoring capabilities (djinteractive.com).
You receive the headline of matching news articles for free, and then pay a fee to access the stories that interest you. Jim Carroll is co-author of Light Bulbs to Yottabits: How to Profit
by Understanding the Internet of the Future , and can be reached by E-mail at jcarroll@jimcarroll.com
Document glob000020010827dvcr01vfm

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

121/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Canoe paddles out of sea of red ink Canada's most visited Web content site is popular - now profitability is the challenge
MARK EVANS
948 words
11 February 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- In the past year, Canoe LP has become Canada's most visited content site on the World Wide Web . The challenge now is translating that popularity into profits.
Since most of Canoe's revenue is generated by advertisements, the company's path to profitability is straightforward: more advertising at higher prices.
The ability to execute that strategy, however, isn't that simple because the on-line advertising market in Canada is in its infancy, representing just 0.2 per cent of the $10-billion-a-year
business.
Graham Duffy, Canoe's president and chief executive officer, said the low penetration of on-line advertising means there's huge possibilities for Web site operators.
His optimism is supported by Forrester Research Inc., which predicted that on-line advertising in Canada will jump to $20-million (U.S.) in 1998 from $10-million in 1997. The
Cambridge, Mass., company expects the market to climb to $25-million this year, $55-million in 2000, $105-million in 2001, $180-million in 2002 and $270-million in 2003.
Canoe, which is 60-per-cent owned by Toronto-based Sun Media Corp. and 40-per-cent by Montreal-based BCE Inc., doesn't expect to be profitable for at least a couple of years. But
Mr. Duffy is confident that its patience will eventually be rewarded.
"We've got a realization and understanding that it takes time to build a successful brand," he said. "We think we can get 20 per cent of the $400-million [Canadian] advertising market in
2003."
A key part of Canoe's growth plan is traffic. The higher the number of people who visit the Web site, the more attractive it is to advertisers.
The number of page views jumped to 46.2 million last month from 28 million in September, Mr. Duffy said. (That number includes visits to www .canoe.com [http://www.canoe.com/]
and the Web sites of the Sun's newspapers .)
That makes Canoe the most popular Web site in Canada, far ahead of Southam Inc.'s www .canada.com [http://www.canada.com/] site, with eight million page views a month, and
Torstar Corp.'s www .toronto.com [http://www.toronto.com/] and www .thestar.com [http://www.thestar.com/] sites, which generate 16 million page views.
Canoe has become a destination for more Web surfers because it offers free services such as electronic mail, financial tools, and content from Sun Media newspapers , Mr. Duffy
says.
By giving people more reasons to visit the site, Canoe aims to become Canada's first "portal." (A portal is a Web site that attracts millions of visits and often is the first place people go
on-line.) This strategy has already been adopted in the United States by such firms as Yahoo Inc. and CNet Inc.
Jim Carroll, co-author of The 1999 Canadian Internet Handbook, said Canoe is impressive because it has a wide range of up-to-date content. He added, however, that its use of
multiple brands to identify different parts of its Web site gives it a "schizophrenic" feel.
Mr. Carroll said that while there's room for a few content-based sites like Canoe, he wonders about Sun Media's willingness to keep investing in it when it won't be profitable for a few
more years.
"The big question is how long can they afford to do what they're doing," he said.
Mr. Duffy said there are more signs that advertisers are viewing the Internet as an important part of their marketing plans. In December, he said, Canoe signed up such clients as
Cathay Pacific Airlines and The New York Times.
The positive report by Forrester Research has helped, Mr. Duffy said, because it has alleviated some of the skepticism that advertisers had about the on-line market.
"They're realizing they have to be in this game and there's a great advantage to being the first mover," he said, adding that Canoe is also exploring other ways to make money, such as
electronic commerce and content subscriptions.
Canoe's prospects will probably be bolstered by the purchase of Sun Media by Montreal-based Quebecor Inc.
Although Canoe has a firm foothold in the market, there are many competitors aggressively going after the same consumers and advertisers.
The Canadian Broadcasting Corp., for example, plans to spend $20-million a year on its Web site, www .cbc.ca [http://www.cbc.ca/], which features an impressive amount of text, video
and audio content from its reporters around the world.
Torstar also has lofty aspirations and was hoping to create a Web powerhouse when it launched its unsuccessful takeover bid for Sun Media.
Rocco Rossi, Torstar's vice-president of strategic planning and new media, said the Toronto-based company will continue to build on its strong Web presence in Toronto and Southern
Ontario.
However, he said, Torstar would also like to participate in a national Web site, through equity investments, marketing agreements or alliances. Torstar's deal last month to buy four Sun
Media newspapers from Quebecor includes an agreement to discuss forging a relationship between Torstar's Web sites and those of Quebecor.
With large investments needed to stay ahead of the pack, there will likely be consolidation among Canada's content-based Web sites as larger players position themselves for the
future .
"The stakes are higher, the risks are a little higher but the rewards are certainly there if you believe [the Internet ] will be a key medium," Mr. Duffy said.
Site seeing
www .canoe.com [http://www.canoe.com/] www .torstar.com [http://www.torstar.com/] www .toronto.com [http://www.toronto.com/] www .cbc.ca [http://www.cbc.ca/]
Illustration

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

122/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Document glob000020010827dv2b007ur

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

123/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Torstar set to report on Net, TV holdings --- Fourth pillar in results groupings
Robert Cribb

341 words
26 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Torstar Corp. is putting all of its new media investments in one basket to consolidate the company's Internet and television holdings in future financial statements.
Torstar's latest financial results, being released today, will list the company's new media holdings under the Interactive Media banner for the first time. The new category will list financial
results from Torstar's nearly 20 Web sites, Toronto Star Television and a $40 million portfolio of Internet -related investments.
"The Internet is seen as one of the major changes in business and this shows investors we're making an effort to participate in that change ," said Bob Steacy, Torstar's vicepresident of finance. "It highlights the fact that we believe these investments are important to the future of the company."
Interactive media will join Torstar's three traditional corporate pillars: the newspaper group (which publishes The Toronto Star, Canada's largest daily newspaper ); Harlequin
Enterprises, the world's largest publisher of romance fiction; and Children's Supplementary Education Publishing Division, which publishes educational materials.
Included under the new financial reporting category will be such Web sites as thestar.com (containing news and information from the company's newspapers ), toronto.com (an
online city guide) and globecareers.com (a job-posting site in which Torstar recently invested).
Torstar has also invested in a cluster of other Internet -related ventures, including Women.com Inc. (a Web site for women), Grocery Gateway.com Inc. (an online grocery-shopping
service in Toronto) and Autoweb.com Inc. (a Web-based car-shopping site).
Toronto Star Television, or TSTV, which is broadcast on basic cable to Rogers and Shaw cable customers, reaches 1.4 million households in the Toronto area.
While the Internet has yet to produce many profitable ventures, it's a growing trend in the industry to showcase online assets as a symbol of promising things to come, said Doug
Kirk, a research analyst with Nesbitt-Burns Inc.
Document tor0000020010830dvaq01218

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

124/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

E-COMMERCE II
Advertising Special Report

Investors wrapped up in the Web Orders for stocks, bonds, options and mutual funds can be placed 24 hours a day, seven
days a week.
The Globe and Mail
1234 words
15 June 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Colleen Moorehead realized that the buying and selling of stocks over the Internet had moved into the mainstream when her 72-year-old father completed his first on-line transaction.
"One day, he went down to the basement, came back up and said he did a trade," says Ms. Moorehead, President of Toronto-based Versus Technologies Inc., which operates E*Trade
Canada under licence from E*Trade Inc. of Paolo Alto, Calif.
While Ms. Moorehead's father could be suspected of bias toward on-line trading, there is no doubt the Internet has quickly become a major influence on the brokerage industry.
Forrester Research Inc., a high-tech consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass., expects the number of Canadians who have Internet trading accounts with companies such as E*Trade,
Charles Schwab Canada and bank-owned on-line brokerages will soar to 1.1 million by 2003, from 200,000 in 1998.
Evidence of growth
Further evidence of the Internet 's growth in the investment market comes from Credit Suisse First Boston, which estimates that 13.7 per cent of all equity trades in the United States in
the fourth quarter of last year were done over the Internet , compared with 8.9 per cent a year earlier.
Even more impressive is that the Bank of Nova Scotia's Scotia Discount Brokerage Inc. unit estimates about 50 per cent of its transactions are done over the Internet .
Andrew Scipio del Campo, the discount broker's President and Chief Executive Officer, says the number of on-line transactions this year has tripled from the corresponding period in
1998.
It is easy to understand why investors have jumped on board the Internet so enthusiastically.
In Canada, on-line brokerage fees are as low as $27 a trade; orders for stocks, options, mutual funds and bonds can be placed 24 hours a day, seven days a week; and making a trade
is as simple as clicking your mouse a few times.
The influence and power of technology within the on-line brokerage market should not be underestimated. While it lets investors easily make trades, it has also helped level the playing
field by giving all investors access to a huge amount of information from different sources.
Whether it's World Wide Web sites dedicated to financial news or undiscovered stock finds, or paging services that provide automatic notification when a stock reaches a specific
price, technology is being used to empower investors and it has become a way that brokerage firms can differentiate themselves in the market.
Investment firms participating in the on-line market have capitalized on the information highway by creating Web sites with an extensive amount of information such as real-time quotes,
portfolio-tracking abilities, access to research reports and economic data, chat rooms and interactive forums to link clients with corporate executives.
Ms. Moorehead says investing over the Internet has been a smash hit with investors because it gives them the power to make decisions whenever they want, rather than relying on a
discount or full-service broker to handle their trading activities.
"As life gets faster, you search for things that you can control," she points out. "The Internet lets the consumer take back buying power and that translates into lower costs."
E*Trade changed the competitive dynamic of Canada's brokerage industry when it started offering on-line services last year. While it has just 8,200 customers, E*Trade has had a
huge influence by raising awareness of the Internet in Canada as a trading vehicle. Versus gave E*Trade's profile with investors another boost when it completed a $41.9-million initial
public offering in March.
Charles Schwab Corp., the world's leader Internet broker, made the competitive landscape even more interesting in December when it moved into Canada following the acquisition of
discount brokerage firms Priority Brokerage Inc. and Porthmeor Securities for an undisclosed amount.
Priority and Porthmeor were merged to create Charles Schwab Canada, and Paul Bates, who played a leading role in the growth of the discount brokerage industry while with TD
Green Line, was appointed President and CEO.
Steve Kruspe, Chief Technology Officer with Charles Schwab Canada, says the company has attempted to differentiate itself from its on-line competitors by offering consumers the
choice of how much service they want.
For investors looking for no frills and low prices, he says, Charles Schwab has on-line trading; those looking for a little more direct service can use its discount brokerage services; and
investors who want to be pampered can use the firm's full-service unit.
"If you look at where we've come from, the Internet has revolutionized the industry is a short period of time," Mr. Kruspe says.
However, the publicity that E*Trade and Charles Schwab have received has overshadowed some of the major moves made by banks in recent years.
The Royal Bank of Canada's Action Direct discount brokerage subsidiary, which started offering Internet trading in January of 1998, now has 100,000 on-line investors.
Michael Bastian, President of Toronto-based Action Direct, says Internet investing has gained momentum as investors have become more comfortable with Net security and ease of
use.
One component of Action Direct's growth has been the rapid involvement of clients who are 55 years and older. Mr. Bastian says this shows how the Internet has gone beyond the
early-adopter stage to the mainstream market.
"It is people who have retired, have money, and it becomes a hobby to manage your own resources."
Not surprisingly, technology is expected to play an even greater role in the future of on-line trading as the Internet becomes more prevalent and relevant to investors.
On the near horizon will be more ways to receive information and make orders using non-computer devices such as handheld organizers, wireless telephones and pagers.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

125/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Recently, Charles Schwab Canada and Bell Mobile Communications Inc. announced a new service called PocketBroker that allows Bell Mobile's subscribers to use their digital
wireless telephones to log on to their Charles Schwab account, execute trades and receive real-time quotes.
One of the most exciting products is 3Com Corp.'s pocket-sized Palm VII, the world's first wireless personal organizer, slated to be introduced in Canada this year. With the Palm VII,
investors will be able to send and receive E-mail, do electronic-commerce transactions such as stock purchases, visit specific Internet sites and create watch lists of favourite stocks.
Mr. Kruspe says Charles Schwab plans to offer its PocketBroker services on the Palm VII.
"Different people invest differently and they have different objectives and needs," he explains. "Just like we give them a choice to have a human relationship, the customer has a choice
on the device they want to use."
Ms. Moorehead says the ever-growing amount of information and services on-line brokers are offering will help players such as E*Trade have a bigger impact on the investment
industry than when discount brokers appeared.
"We are an on-line investment firm, not a discount firm," she says, adding that the combination of rich services at a low cost will prove to be an irresistible combination.
Document glob000020010827dv6f00v0o

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

126/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Interface Selections from The Globe and Mail's Web site: www.globetechnology.com
The Globe and Mail
1078 words
18 February 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

It's smooth sailing for cyberpirates, if this week's on-line poll of Globe readers is any indication.
Technology reporter Tyler Hamilton delved into the world of those who trade, buy and sell music over the World Wide Web using a file-shrinking technology called MP3. The article,
The Tune Traffickers, examined the debate over whether such activities are illegal.
But in lopsided voting, 82 per cent of respondents to The Globe's poll at www .globetechnology.com [http://www.globetechnology.com/] said that those who copy music files over the
Web should not be prosecuted.
Once again, debate in the discussion forums was more evenhanded. Many argued that cyberpiracy is a most excellent way for fans to vent frustration with music megafirms. But a
strong minority argued that theft is theft, whether it occurs on the Web or not.
This, and every week in Interface, we print the best of the submissions to The Globe's technology Web site. Robert Feb. 11, at 2:24 p.m.
For years record companies have been charging us $20 and up for something that costs 7 cents to make.
So now people are rebelling against it and making their own CDs. Music companies should listen to this, and learn from what these people are doing.
They don't want entire albums, they want to be able to mix and make their own collections, and they don't want to spend a fortune on music.
Greg Lefsrud Feb. 11, at 6:25 p.m.
I think it's high time this industry got shaken down. We have been subjected to the whim of the few, with respect to the music we hear for far too long. All of that is now going to
change .
And for the naysayers who believe the artists themselves will suffer? Not a chance. The perfervid fans of artists will be more than willing to pay to receive their latest hits directly from
Web sites run by the artists themselves.
Vince De Piante Feb. 11, at 7:12 p.m.
I am in a Toronto-based band, Alice. Our songs are currently available at www .mp3.com [http://www.mp3.com/].
We have been contacted by one of the five major labels via www .mp3.com [http://www.mp3.com/]. There are now 15,000 people listening to Alice via MP3. How can this be bad?
As far as the music industry goes, stealing is stealing and any form of theft must be dealt with. Record labels are in the business of making money and access to their product with no
compensation must be stopped.
Before any discussion (or article written) can be started regarding MP3, a distinction must be made between the two. These are two separate issues and these issues must be
completely separated.
Michael Martin Feb. 11, at 10:39 p.m.
When did it become legal and ethical to steal? It seems that just because it is so easy to capture music off of the Web and you are not exposed for doing it, that it is somehow okay to
take it, publish it, or copy it. Well, for some, this is still not right.
J. P. Hornbrook Feb. 12, at 9:02 a.m.
As a music consumer I download MP3 files and purchase music CDs. Why do I do both? Because it's inconvenient to solely download MP3 files -- they're hard to find and usually slow
to download -- and I don't like gambling on a full CD when all I know is one song.
Here's the digital wake-up call: Develop a new music industry business model that allows convenient consumption while maintaining an acceptable pricing structure for both artist and
customer. Guess what? MP3 allows that format to become an on-line industry.
Guy D. Pattison Feb. 12, at 4:40 p.m.
Similar to those who make extra copies of PC software, there are those who download MP3 files to our PCs and burn copies of MP3 files for home use.
Why? Because these products are overpriced in relation to the costs incurred to make them. I'm tired of paying for the marketing costs associated with PC software and music. The
Internet itself is a threat to the music business because now the artist can eliminate the middleman and sell directly to the public.
Wayne Prior Feb. 14, at 6:12 p.m.
Tired of the injustice of buying something that is physically worth pennies? Don't look now, but many other art forms get distributed on material that is next to worthless as well.
Crucify me for saying this, but the record industry does not make money off of every band that gets signed. I've heard statistics that for every major band, there are almost 20 smaller
bands supported by it.
In the midst of this, you unleash a technology with could kill the cash cows of the record industry.
What happens to the marginal artists? What happens to the new artists? Call me a purist, but I think making a complete record is an art, and a very good one at that.
What happens if you unleash market forces on individual songs? Am I to expect the death of the EP, with artists simply releasing a song every six months in the hopes that each song
will be a hit and move more copies off some Web site?
I shudder at the thought that that could be the future . Of course, this stuff is all new and the music industry may get ported to the Net in a fashion I may like.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

127/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

But I'll stick to my local music store, thank you very much.
Jeremy
Feb. 15, at 6:39 p.m.
Let's not forget that CD technology is now about 20 years old, and therefore not the best sound technology available. There are so many new technologies out there which sound a
million times better than CDs, but because the record companies have invested so much money into the CD, the consumer can't access anything else.
And is anyone else as irritated about the ongoing nonsense of CD overpackaging as I am?
THIS WEEK'S QUESTION
Will new automobile technologies change the way we drive?
Vote at www .globetechnology.com [http://www.globetechnology.com/]
ON-LINE BOOTLEGGING
Should people be prosecuted for copying music files over the Web?
Yes
No

18%
82%

Document glob000020010827dv2i00a7x

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

128/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

SPECIALS

Internet holds wealth of knowledge for investors --- Online resources can educate and define investment goals
Marc Dacey
1136 words
20 November 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Investment planners use Web, PCs, U6
If you've begun investing in the last decade, it's safe to say that the two biggest stories of the '90s are the popularization of mutual funds as investment vehicles and the advent of the
Internet .
The former has had a direct effect on stock market capitalization (also known as the "bull that wouldn't die"), while the latter has created new, challenging and often volatile investment
opportunities, and made electronic trading feasible and straightforward for non-brokers.
This has put pressure on traditional brokerage companies, and has made discount mutual fund and stock traders very profitable.
Less obvious is how widespread Internet access, particularly among middle-class investors, has greatly facilitated investor education. The average fund investors of 10 years ago
would entrust most or all of their asset management to their broker or financial adviser.
By contrast, today's motivated investor, seeking to take a more active role in portfolio management and lower costs such as management-expense ratios, is drawn increasingly to noload funds and online trading.
Investment education has made these changes possible, and much of that knowledge is available online .
In the past three years, banks, fund companies, discount brokerages, third-party advisers and even individuals have been quick to establish presences online .
A varied store of knowledge surrounds the terminology of funds, GICs and retirement saving plans This has created a varied store of knowledge surrounding the terminology of funds,
GICs and retirement saving plans in general, and facts on specific products and their respective levels of risk, return and costs to the buyer.
As the Web has matured, most sites have become easier to navigate, even for those new to the online game. Frequently, the most informative sites are run by firms that can be
expected to show a bias in favour of their own fund products, but this does not render them useless.
On the contrary, partisan sites can help new investors ask the right questions when, and if, it comes time to buy. Also, for those looking to save money, searching the Web for RSP and
fund information is significantly cheaper than attending investor seminars and can be faster than reading investment books.
A good place to start the fund investment learning process is to get a grasp on the terminology. The industry association for the Canadian mutual fund business, the Investment Funds
Institute of Canada
( www .ific.ca [http://www.ific.ca/]), sets industry ethical standards and has a comprehensive glossary.
IFIC's site also has a great Investor Education section that covers the gamut from "funds for dummies" articles to sophisticated pieces on specialities such as derivatives and registered
retirement income funds (RRIFs).
A larger, more general business glossary is run by The Star ( www .thestar.com/thestar/editorial/ [http://www.thestar.com/thestar/editorial/]
glossary/alist.html). While less specific to fund investing, it is sure to make reading the business pages more rewarding.
Articles and glossaries give simply worded overviews of how investment markets work Fund seller Canada Trust, in conjunction with the non-profit Investor Learning Centre (ILC), has
some excellent resources at www .canada [http://www.canada/]
trust.com/ctsecurities/ilc/index.htm .
The ILC articles and glossary give simply worded overviews of how investment markets work. The language is blessedly plain, and the articles put across fairly complex investment
concepts.
The ILC also has a top-notch Investor Protection section, which gives valuable cautions that apply to new investors and veterans. Over-all, the site demystifies investing, particularly for
beginners.
Third-party investing news and commentary sites are many and varied. An obvious first stop is The Star's online Smart Money pages ( www .thestar.com/editorial/smart97/
[http://www.thestar.com/editorial/smart97/]
index.html), with links to specific mutual fund information at iMoney's site ( www .imoney.com/bm_apps/tsfunds/ [http://www.imoney.com/bm_apps/tsfunds/]
cgi-bin/fund.pl) and The Star's own Canadian Fund Guide (fundguide.tor
star.com/index.cfm), which carries RealAudio clips on specific funds.
The I-Money site ( www .imo [http://www.imo/]
ney.com) is consumer-oriented, with plenty of investment-basics articles and tools, along with the opportunity to purchase stocks, funds and even car insurance online . Brokers, your
ears are burning.
The competing GLOBEfund site ( www .globefund.com [http://www.globefund.com/]) has a wealth of mutual-fund industry news , commentary, and statistics.
The site also has a comprehensive primer on fund investing by economist Ranga Chand. Web veteran The Fund Library ( www .fundlibrary.com [http://www.fundlibrary.com/]) has
extensive investment commentary, industry buzz and research services, as well as impressive online factoids on Canadian mutual fund companies.
Portfolio Analytics Ltd. (PAL), at www .pal.com [http://www.pal.com/], was an early player in the online mutual fund game, and this authoritative site has just gotten better over the
years.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

129/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Site visitors can search more than 2,200 specific funds or fund companies by name, type and performance, among other criteria. Particularly helpful for the self-directed fund shopper
are PAL's capsule reviews of each fund's invest objectives and subsequent performance.
For the online investor in quest of truly daunting amounts of information attractively presented, check the vast SEDAR (System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval) site
( www .sedar.com [http://www.sedar.com/]).
Maintained by the Canadian Depository for Securities, this huge database collates all business documents for publicly traded firms and mutual funds in Canada since the start of 1997.
Included are press releases, prospectuses, receipts and reports contained as PDFs - a now-widespread format from Adobe that requires a free "plug-in" for your Web browser.
The beauty (or the horror, depending on one's thirst for such things) of the SEDAR service is that all Canadian public firms are obliged by law to file these documents electronically. If
you cannot find information on your favourite stock or fund here, it may be dodgy.
The above sites are only a start, and in no sense lessen the utility of books or one-on-one investment advice.
Web-based investment information can go a long way to informing investors, which should lead to better decision-making, or at the very least, less of a feeling of helplessness in the
face of saving for one's retirement.
Tips, articles and numbers found online cannot make your investment decisions for you, nor can they guarantee a profit at the end of the day. Online resources can, however, aid in
defining your investment goals and strengthening your grasp on the fundamentals of investing.
That alone is probably worth the cost of your Internet connection or a trip to your local library.
--Mark Dacey is a Toronto-based journalist specializing in finance and technology.
E-TRADING 101: Students learn day trading, which depends heavily on computers, at a course at Ryerson Polytechnical University .
Document tor0000020010830dvbk015jw

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

130/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

PAPERMAKING
News

For 40 years, China has been something to write home about
MIRO CERNETIG
1294 words
2 October 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Beijing -- Each morning at reveille, the revolutionary songs of the nearby People's Liberation Army barracks drift over our compound's barbed-wire fence and through the windows of
The Globe and Mail's Beijing walkup. Waking up in the oldest listening post held by any Western newspaper , it's a daily reminder some things haven't changed in the People's
Republic of China.
Yesterday marked the 50th anniversary of the Communist Revolution .
But it was also exactly 40 years ago that The Globe took up an invitation from Chairman Mao Tsetung and Frederick Nossal became the first Western newspaper reporter in Peking.
The chairman was an admirer of Canadian doctor Norman Bethune, who died helping the Communist rebels before their victory in 1949. People of such stock, Mao thought, would be
more reliable, kinder observers of the people's revolution .
Yet the first occupant of The Globe's bureau was extended no undue comforts.
Mr. Nossal found himself cloistered in the Xinqiao Hotel, lulled to sleep by the Teletype and bolted awake by late-night calls from the China bureaucracy's nameless officials. Get up! the
voices would order, you are wanted at such-and-such a ministry.
Mr. Nossal and the two other Western correspondents in Beijing, wire-service reporters from Reuters and Agence France-Presse, would often find themselves listening to the latest
wheat quotas or what was deemed as a significant warming of relations with China's comrades in other Communist bloc countries. Occasionally, there was a kernel of real news to be
gleaned.
Taking stock of the situation, and frustrated to a frazzle by the near impossibility of making real connections with normal Chinese, The Globe's man wondered: "Why did they allow
reporters in at all?"
Today, for The Globe bureau's 15th resident, things are considerably more pleasant. For one thing, there are hundreds of fellow journalists now granted the government's little blue
books, with gold lettering, allowing journalists to try to figure out what is happening in one of the most complex countries on the planet.
The Globe's three-bedroom apartment is located in the heart of Sanlitun, the old embassy district that has happily been revamped.
The bakery across the street, with the city's best baguettes, was bulldozed a few months ago so that grass could be planted for today's National Day. But a short distance away, we still
have Jiuba Jie, bar street, where libations, a plate of French fries or a pizza await the Western visitor.
You can now meet the new middle class of Chinese there, strike up a conversation and, if you wish, invite someone back for dinner to talk politics, poetry or punk rock.
The old China, though, always awaits at the gate.
The entrance to the compound containing The Globe's apartment is guarded 24 hours a day by People's Army soldiers, just as it always has been. They are ruddy-faced peasant boys,
who sometimes forget to put on the proper shoes and show up for duty in slippers.
Often, late at night when they think nobody is listening, you will find them singing pop tunes to themselves, gently swaying as they stand at attention.
But they never fail in their duty to halt a Chinese citizen (or a foreigner who looks Chinese) who dares to enter the foreign ghetto.
"What is your business here?" they demand, asking for identity cards. When I go down to pick up my Chinese friends, they are embarrassed by this reverse apartheid, but usually they
shrug their shoulders with a smile.
In 1984, Allen Abel, The Globe's 11th correspondent, aptly described the newspaper 's bureau as "located within the People's Republic, but in no way part of it."
It must be said that things are better today. We are still not part of China, but you can with increasing frequency get past the red tape, the overly zealous bureaucrats, to get snippets of
reality.
For one thing, we have telephones. My line comes from the noodle shop across the alleyway, connected to the Internet and E-mail. There is a veritable deluge of information about
China. The trick in reporting is not reading the tea leaves, but rather avoiding being buried by them.
Most of us still believe that our phones are tapped, a Communist predilection since 1949. And everyone has heard the cautionary story of the public-security officer, angry at a scribe's
soft English, who ordered his subjects to speak up.
Many also think that their apartments are bugged, either through the smoke detectors or chandeliers -- though it grows harder to believe that such daily surveillance is of any use.
There is now slightly more access to decision makers. A decade ago, an interview with China's top leaders was the rarest of accomplishments. Now, the leadership, eager to spin its
side of things in the world media, often grants interviews to TV and newspaper reporters.
The Globe's most recent coup was a chat with Premier Zhu Rongji, who granted an audience -- and that is what it can only be called -- before his visit to Canada and the United States
last spring. To meet him, I had to walk past the red walls of Zhongnanhai, the leadership's high-security compound near the Forbidden City, pass a phalanx of guards with automatic
rifles and go through a metal detector. Inside, Mr. Zhu waited in an expansive hall, not unlike the emperors of old.
Afterward, his assistants demanded to see a transcript, which The Globe provided, though I feared that he might try to change what he had said.
But, in fact, there were no annotations or deletions. He really did want to make sure that we had an accurate translation. Overt censorship, except for a brief period during the 1960s
Cultural Revolution , is still not the preferred practice here.
But one never loses the sensation that reporters are viewed as trouble and that the government's minders wouldn't mind fixing the journalists ' numerous ideological misconceptions
and "errors of judgment."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

131/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Last night, for example, CNN reported the government's attempt to stop the transmission of a report showing the training for today's parade, footage obtained through night-vision
lenses.
In another subtle reminder of who is ultimately in charge, the foreign ministry is now also asking reporters to submit five stories for inspection when they renew their visas.
For the most part, though, all goes well. No critique has yet come my way.
But it's a not-so-subtle reminder that reporters here exist at the people's pleasure. We all hang on a six-month lifeline.
"I understand they analyze everything you write, deciding what the ratio is of positive to negative," one Western diplomat said. "I don't know what the acceptable ratio is, or what is
deemed to be good or bad. But when you land on the wrong side of the ratio, you'll know it."
The attitude in The Globe's bureau and on the foreign desk remains the same as it has been for 40 years. Report it all without favour or prejudice.
In my work, when the government is ordering up medical tests, articles for review and salary raises for the Chinese staff, who both assist and observe me, I often fall back on the advice
of John Fraser, the newspaper 's eighth correspondent.
A year ago, just before I headed off to Beijing, he advised that I would have some terribly frustrating times, but that I would be moved daily by "the Chinese people, who will break your
heart."
He's been right.
Document glob000020010827dva201f3c

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

132/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Focus Column

Beware the fallacy of the newspaper dinosaur
WILLIAM THORSELL
840 words
13 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A25
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

No other single business devotes more resources to gathering, processing, selling and distributing information than newspapers . Newspapers were in the information business
before the Information Business was born. If there is an "information explosion" now due to new technology, or more profoundly, an "information transformation" that catches up banks
and airlines and grocery stores in its maw, newspapers should have all the advantages of being there first.
But being there first is often no advantage at all. It is frequently the champions of the old model that fall hard and soon to new ways of serving old needs -- or new ways of serving new
needs. The more radical the technological transformation, the more vulnerable the champions of the old paradigm. And that is where many people see newspapers and other
traditional media sitting today -- on the beach, gazing out with bovine placidity at the tidal wave approaching.
Is it accurate?
It is commonly noted that cinema, radio, magazines and newspapers all survived television, which was the transforming technology of the mid-20th century, so why should traditional
media now fall to digital power and the Internet ? Isn't there "room for one more" -- again?
The proportion of Americans reading a newpaper daily has fallen from 67 per cent in 1977 to only 51 per cent now, and newspapers ' share of total advertising revenue has fallen from
more than 30 per cent three decades ago to about 21 per cent of the pie now. Yet newspapers remain among the most profitable businesses in the community. Why?
Because the absolute value of 21 per cent market share is higher than 30 per cent of a smaller market three decades ago.
Because newspapers have used technology to dramatically cut their costs and expand their scope.
Because newspapers are competing less head-to-head among themselves, targeting to readers and advertisers much more efficiently by segmenting markets.
Reaching half the adult population on an average weekday remains a prodigious feat, and testifies more to newspapers ' basic attributes, strength and creativity than their vulnerability
in the face of so much technological and demographic change .
In fact, newspaper ad revenue is very buoyant again, with the big U.S. companies reporting major gains in revenues, driven ironically by advertising from the ".com" sector. Which
leads to the first great caution in peering ahead: "Beware the fallacy of the fixed pie."
Higher productivity and smarter marketing in a growing economy can put the kibosh to the darkest forecasts of doom. Nevertheless, some people feel that the Internet will be more
threatening to traditional media because it is so fundamentally transforming -- the internal combustion engine meets the horse.
The printing press allowed one person to reach many; the telephone allowed one to reach one; the Internet allows many to reach many, purportedly threatening older media with one
Great Extinction.
Which leads to a second great caution in looking ahead: "Beware the fallacy of the dinosaur."
Dinosaurs were not very smart, could not see ahead and didn't have any time to adapt. None of this applies to the human leaders of conventional media, some of whom are smart, a
few of whom can peer ahead and a couple of whom will adapt through brilliant invention to the converging technology of the Internet .
Newspapers are already working to cannibalize their own revenues on the Internet before someone else does, establishing on-line classified and careers sites in league with their
printed editions, and speciality Web pages that add value to what appears on paper. Newspaper companies are typically not the first or most aggressive in creating these new
businesses, but they are not lumbering old giants either.
The Financial Times of London, for example, is hiring another 100 journalists to staff its FT.com Web site, which will be a real-time, fully interactive financial community information
portal on a global scale. This is much more visionary than creating parallel classified Web sites and serves as a good example of leveraging and leapfrogging a famous brand right into
the heart of a much more dynamic information medium.
Ironically, we risk dismissing the potential of conventional media because we rely on conventional models of analysis -- fixed rather than growing pies, market shares rather than market
alliances, competing technologies rather than technological convergence.
Ten years hence, more targeted and refined conventional media such as newspapers and television stations will serve smaller proportions of growing markets with far more efficiency
and decent profitability. Newspapers may be printed at home or appear on electronic page tablets -- which would lower newspaper production costs by huge orders of magnitude.
Leading newspaper and broadcast brands will be near the centre of converged media, whose economics will include transaction revenues, service fees and commissions, as well as
typical advertising and subscription sources. Converged media will be interactive and more national and global than local in their reach.
For newspaper companies, happy days are here again, and still. See you around.
E-mail: wthorsell@globeandmail.ca
Document glob000020010827dvbd01ncz

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

133/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Putting your pix online is a snap!
The Toronto Star
1629 words
15 July 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Multimedia
Gerry Blackwell
You're back from summer holidays and you've got a digicam full of great shots of the kids cavorting in the lake, hubby with the Peace Tower growing out of his head, you screaming on
a roller coaster at Canada's Wonderland.
Now what're you going to do with your pics?
Sure you could print them on your colour inkjet printer, or send them to a digital photo finisher to be made into more professional-looking prints. Then what?
If you want people to actually see your snaps, don't hide them away in an album. Put them up on the Web. Then e-mail friends and family and tell them where to point their browsers.
For more than a year now, several companies have been offering low- or no-cost services that allow you to upload your digital - or digitized - snaps to a public or password-protected
private Web page. Your own Web photo gallery.
Most also let you add text descriptions of your pictures, some even let you add voice notes. And the whole process is typically simple and quick. You can have a Web site up in less
than 30 minutes in most cases.
Nothing is ever entirely free, of course. If you want complete control over your Web page and unlimited capacity, you're going to have to pay. The free offer is typically for limited storage
space and/or limited posting time.
These sites hope to make money either by selling you a premium membership (for more storage space or posting time) or selling you products - prints, coffee mugs, cookies etc. created using your, or somebody's else's, photos.
Yes, I said cookies. More on that in a minute.
I looked at a few of these sites recently, including my new favourite, ClubPhoto ( www .clubphoto.com [http://www.clubphoto.com/]).
Others include Sony's ImageStation (http://imagestation [http://imagestation].sony.com), Fujifilm's fujifilm.net ( www .fujifilm.net/signup [http://www.fujifilm.net/signup] index.htm) and
Kodak's PhotoNet Online (http://kodak34 [http://kodak34].photonet.com/account.htm).
One of the originals, Pictranet ( www .pictranet.com [http://www.pictranet.com/]) appears to be in trouble.
The site is still there. But the link to download the software you need to create a Web page doesn't work. And the link to Pictra Inc.'s home page also wasn't working when I checked
last week. Sounds serious - but could be nothing.
Each of these sites has its advantages and disadvantages, but I found ClubPhoto the best overall.
`If you want people to see your snaps, don't hide them in an album. Put them on the Web. Then e-mail friends and family and tell them where to find them.'
It offers unlimited space - but takes your pages down if no one accesses them for 90 days. And the downloadable Living Album 99 software gives you more control over the look of your
pages than most.
Here's how ClubPhoto works. Others work similarly - though the one downside with ClubPhoto is that the sign-up routine is a little more complicated than with some.
First, you go to the site and click the First Time Visitors button. This will take you to a page that explains the basics and provides a link to Sign Me Up Now!
At the bottom of the next page, you enter your e-mail address in the space provided and click the button beside it. ClubPhoto e-mails you your activation information - a userid,
password (which you can change later) and software key to enable the Living Album 99 software.
Most photo gallery sites do not require as much security and don't make you wait for an e-mail.
Your ClubPhoto account has now been created. The next step is to download and install the Living Album software, which you do as you would with any other download program.
The first time you launch Living Album, you have to enter the software key you received in the e-mail. After that, it behaves normally.
I found the program a little buggy. All the main functions I tried worked, but the screens did not display properly. This may be some incompatibility with my video system, however.
Living Album lets you create albums and slide shows for viewing on your own PC, and then lets you upload albums to the Web.
You select the pictures from your hard disk's folders, choose a jazzy background for when you display the album from your PC's hard disk, and add descriptions of the album and
individual pictures if you want, and even voice notes.
To make voice notes, you'll need a microphone attached to your sound card. You can record them using the Windows Sound Recorder applet.
When you're finished creating the album, you'll see a page with thumbnail-size versions of the pictures you inserted. Click on a thumbnail and a larger version of the shot pops up.
Now you're ready to create your Web page. Click the Internet /Export as Web page menu item to launch a wizard that walks you through the multi-step process.
This is where ClubPhoto offers a little more flexibility. You can pick the size of the thumbnails and enlargements on your Web page, background colour, number of columns, font and so
on.
When you've answered all the questions in the wizard, click the Build Web Page Now. Your PC grinds away - for seconds or minutes depending on how powerful it is - while you watch
a bar guage.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

134/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

When this process is complete you still don't have a Web page on the Web, but you have a Web page on your PC. Click the Preview button to see how it will look and work when it is
up on the Web. If you don't like what you see, you can back up through the wizard and change things.
Finally, you click the Transfer Files Now button and Living Album uploads your pages to the ClubPhoto site.
To view your album, go to the ClubPhoto home page and enter your e-mail address in the Visit Member's Home Page box, then click the button. You'll come to a page with your name
at the top and a list of your albums - you can have as many as you like.
You can also set it up so that when you click My Photos on the ClubPhoto home page it will take you to your page.
At the listings page, click the name of the album you want. If you password-protected the album, there's a place to type in the password.
When you get to the album page, you'll see the thumbnails arranged on the page in the way you specified, in the size you specified, against your choice of background colours. Click a
thumbnail to see a full-size version on a page by itself.
ClubPhoto automatically creates links on your pages. On the thumbnails page, there is a button you (or anyone) can click to e-mail an announcement of the album's availability. It
brings up a Web-based e-mail form.
Another button takes viewers to a page where they can add a comment to your "guest book" - or read others' comments.
On the pages for invidual pictures there are a series of slide show buttons at the top that let you scroll through the pictures without going back to the thumbnails page.
There is also a button - and this is the most important one from ClubPhoto's point of view - that takes you to a screen where you can buy products online created using the picture.
Prices (all in U.S.) are not bad: $2.95 for a 3x5 print , $17.95 for a T-shirt - and $34.95 or $36.95 for photo cookies.
That's right. ClubPhoto has found some way of printing photos in cookie icing, which it claims is "100 per cent edible." Only in America!
I had my first album up in under 25 minutes. You can check it out at http://members2.clubphoto.com/gerry111734 [http://members2.clubphoto.com/gerry111734].
A couple of things to think about before you go ahead and join ClubPhoto, though.
Unless you password-protect your album - which I did not when I created mine - anybody and everyone can use your pictures to create prints, T-shirts, mugs, etc. And you don't get
anything for it.
ClubPhoto in effect assumes copyright to your pictures.
Also, the company posts advertising at the top of your page. Again, ClubPhoto is making money - theoretically - from your intellectual property.
But unless you're a professional photographer, this is probably of little consequence.
Besides, you can always password protect. And if you buy the premium membership - $39.95 U.S. per year - your pages will be advertising free.
With the premium membership you also get no time limit and you get to download the Living Album Pro version which lets you add video clips to your site as well as audio.
ClubPhoto has a nice clubby feel to it. The home page features a picture of the month posted by a member, and a Web page showcase. The current showcase, on a California man,
Ron Reznick, is very impressive.
Reznick has megabytes and megabytes of pictures up on his pages, many taken with a Nikon Coolpix 950 digital camera. Although Reznick is an amateur, the quality is high.
--Freelance writer Gerry Blackwell covers multimedia CD-ROMs. E-mail him at gerryblackwell@home.com.
HOLY MATRIMONY, BATMAN! ClubPhoto will even let you put your wedding pictures . GOING GA GA: Kodak's PhotoNet , top, has some interesting features, but Gerry Blackwell likes ClubPhoto, which
lets you create attractive albums.
Document tor0000020010830dv7f00mlq

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

135/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

New York Times Co. joins its Net operations --- New company has 50 Web sites
The Toronto Star
224 words
25 May 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

NEW YORK (Reuters) - The New York Times, among the last major U.S. newspapers to succumb to the colour revolution , is determined not to be a late-comer to the electronic
revolution .
Its parent, the New York Times Co., yesterday said it will consolidate its various Internet operations under one roof: Times Company Digital .
With 7 million registered readers for The New York Times on the Web and total revenue from electronic media services increasing more than 18 per cent last year, the Times estimates
its nearly 50 Web sites will bring in revenues of $24 million (U.S.) to $26 million in 1999.
"Because the Internet is dramatically changing the way people obtain news and information, it is essential that we continue to be a leader in cyberspace," said Arthur Sulzberger, Jr.,
chairman of the Times Company.
New York Times Co. publishes The New York Times, The Boston Globe and 21 regional newspapers .
"This step significantly advances our ability to build a high-quality, high-value Internet presence and to respond even more quickly to the fast-moving Web marketplace.
"By aggregating our portfolio of Internet assets into one business unit, we will sharpen our strategic focus and gain the flexibility to bring our digital future to scale."
Document tor0000020010830dv5p00fbr

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

136/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

ME & MY TECHNOLOGY
Report on Business: Technology

Painter mixes old and new media to escape struggles and find 'salvation' Byron Stevens reproduces his landscapes on inkjet printers and sells them on the Web
Kevin Marron
919 words
8 April 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T5
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Byron Stevens paints traditional landscapes, but hopes that new technology can revolutionize the way he sells his art.
Using an ink-jet printing process that makes almost identical copies of original watercolours, the 49-year-old resident of Newmarket, Ont., believes he can escape the narrow confines
of traditional art markets by selling his prints on the World Wide Web .
"It's the first time I've seen technology come to this level in the art world," he says. "It's a revolution in the quality of fine art reproduction and the old distribution model is being blown
away by the Internet ."
Mr. Stevens has long been grappling with the age-old problem of how to make a living as an artist. He has had some success selling original landscapes and handmade prints through
Toronto fine art dealers, but says it was not until he launched a successful second career as a multimedia software designer that he started earning "real money."
His preference, however, is to work with a paintbrush in his hand and feel the scratch of chalk on paper. And he thinks he has at last found a way of making art pay though a process
that could do for artists what desktop publishing has done for many writers.
This involves storing photographs of artwork in a computer and having them reproduced by a process called Iris Giclee, developed by Iris Graphics Inc. of Bedford, Mass. Giclee prints
are made by spraying high-quality ink onto canvas or watercolour paper. If you examine a giclee print through a magnifying glass you can see that the image is made up of tiny dots,
but to the naked eye it is almost impossible to tell that it is not an original watercolour, according to Mr. Stevens.
"It is so close to the original that the only difference in your enjoyment of it will be in your mind, knowing that you have not bought the original," he says.
Until now, artists wanting to reproduce their work for a wider market have generally relied on lithography, an off-set printing process that produces what Mr. Stevens describes as "a
glorified poster." Making lithographs involves investing $10,000 or more to set up a print run and create a series of copies that will have to be stored until they are sold. Once the initial
set-up cost has been paid, however, the individual prints are relatively inexpensive to make.
With the giclee process, on the other hand, Mr. Stevens' up-front cost is about $1,000 -- the cost of having a high-quality photograph taken and then touched up by computer. The
computerized image is stored in a file and prints can be made one at a time, whenever they are needed.
But there is one big drawback to this method: Individual prints generally cost about four times more than lithographs.
Mr. Stevens figured it would be hard to sell giclee prints through the traditional art market, where dealers' and retailers' markups often triple the original price. "It would be as expensive
as a Robert Bateman and I knew I was not going to be able to compete at that level."
So he turned to another technology -- Internet commerce. An program from International Business Machines Corp. called HomePage Creator provided him with everything that he
needed to build an on-line commerce site for his company, called Satori Electronic Publishing Inc. ( www .satoriart.com [http://www.satoriart.com/]).
A lot of people have visited the site since it opened three months ago, mainly because IBM Canada Ltd. has publicized it as an example of its E-commerce solutions. But Mr. Stevens
says he has only had one sale so far. "We get technology people who are interested in E-commerce, but they generally don't buy art."
In the traditional art market, dealers play an important role in helping potential buyers understand the value of art and in convincing them that a particular artist's work is worth buying.
What Mr. Stevens says he now needs is a marketing strategy. He's hoping to target select groups of people. For example, he is planning to contact horticultural societies through the
Internet to try to interest them in paintings of flower arrangements.
Ultimately, he says, he is hoping to profit from the huge advantage that the Internet has over the traditional art market, namely that it does not depend on local contacts. As well, an
artist who is not world-famous can still use the Web to find potential buyers anywhere in the world.
"If what I have is not what people in Toronto like, it may appeal to people in Japan or Italy. I have never lost that sense that somewhere out there in the world there are people who like
what I do," Mr. Stevens says.
With the help of new technology, Mr. Stevens hopes to devote more time to his art.
The irony isn't lost on him. "Making art by hand is the least technological thing you can imagine, but an artist's salvation is coming through technology." Kevin Marron can be reached at
marron@policyplanning.com
IN GEAR
The Person: Byron Stevens, a 49-year-old landscape painter.
The Technology: Iris Giclee, an ink-jet printing process, and IBM's HomePage Creator
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv4800i6o

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

137/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

NEWS

How I spent 5 days online - and lived (but only just) --- I never left home, everything was done by computer
Robert Cribb
1681 words
22 November 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

I have seen the future , and I may need therapy.
After five days living strictly online - no leaving the house or using the phone, except for emergencies - I have managed to eat, work, shop, socialize and sustain life entirely through
computer lines. Sustaining sanity hasn't been as simple.
Still, if you believe the lifestyle trends, this is where we're all headed. Studies show us getting wired to the Internet , working from home, shopping through computer lines,
communicating through e-mail, going out less and living far more of our lives through a computer screen.
Here's a glimpse of what that kind of life can be like:
MONDAY
We begin with an empty fridge. The apartment I share with my partner is stripped down to the following consumables: Three potatoes, chicken broth, a container of Pillsbury dough,
assorted condiments and a half-eaten box of saltines.
After finishing off the last bagel in the freezer for breakfast, I pay a visit to Grocery Gateway ( www .grocerygateway.com [http://www.grocerygateway.com/]). I click my way through the
virtual aisles ordering $72 worth of groceries, including mushrooms, chicken breasts, yogurt, toilet paper and soap.
The earliest delivery time is tomorrow and I need a quick fix. I visit Druxy's deli online shop ( www .druxys.com [http://www.druxys.com/]), and order a corned beef on rye and Greek
salad for delivery.
That was about 11:30 a.m. By 1 p.m., still unfed, I'm applying mustard and relish to saltines. It's another 30 minutes before a delivery guy arrives bearing my order and a $5 service
charge.
Even he seemed puzzled over why I might go through such time and expense to eat a sandwich. "Would you do this again?" he asks.
"Um, I don't think so," I reply.
The trick now is to figure out how to work. With a quick search of some Web databases, I find a half-dozen experts I'd like to contact for a story I'm working on, complete with their email addresses.
That's where speed and efficiency ends.
While e-mail may be great for chatting with far-flung friends once in a while, it offers only frustration when things need to get done quickly.
I file a series of e-mail queries that sit politely in electronic mailboxes waiting to be read, considered and, at some point, replied to. Unlike the ebb and flow of voice-to-voice
conversation, e-mail communication is distorted. Questions go unanswered, you have to guess meaning from unclear writing and all of it is hampered by time delays. What would take
10 minutes on the phone can take days online .
I need more intrusive technology. I need to interrupt someone's day with some questions. Now.
My dialing finger twitches and my stomach feels queasy from the mustard-saltine sandwiches.
TUESDAY
It's 8:19 a.m. and I'm already sitting at my desk, well-rested and reading through the morning news . How remarkable not to have to primp and press, make lunch and squeeze through
morning traffic just to sit at a desk eight kilometres away.
Sure, I look like a squeegee kid in my T-shirt and torn jeans, but who cares? I'm mentally fresh, motivated and on the job. I have access to all the news and information I have at the
office: newspapers , wire services and press releases, in some cases customized to my interests.
I've read through The Star, The Globe and Mail, The National Post and three technology publications without touching newsprint or ink. As I write this, I'm listening to the latest news
from CNN displayed in full-motion video on one corner of my screen. And dozens of other news programs and hundreds of static-free radio stations from around the world are
accessible over Internet lines.
There is one thing missing - the office water cooler. Where's the joy in reading a goofy Mel Lastman quote if you can't share it?
Now that my fingernails are bitten down to the cuticles, those groceries I ordered yesterday finally arrive at the front door, minus about a dozen items that were out of stock: No bagels,
yogurt, strawberries or milk.
The problem: I have luncheon meat with no bread to make a sandwich and I'll have to eat my cereal dry.
Like a culinary MacGyver, I cut off tiny luncheon meat squares to sandwich between pieces of Life cereal. They are both delicious and nutritious.
WEDNESDAY
Today's Web exercise is selling a collection of dusty CDs, finding a buyer by the end of the day without leaving the house.
I find Secondspin.com, an online used CD store based in Denver that buys and sells. Type in the names of the artists you're looking to dump and find the no-quibble, exceedingly fair
price. Who would have thought I could get $8 (U.S.) for The Best of the Doors?
Fifteen CDs from my shelf net $63 (U.S.), but I have to get them to Denver to claim the cash. That's a bit tricky considering I can't go to the post office, so I log on to the FedEx Web site
( www .fedex.com [http://www.fedex.com/]) and order a cross-continental economy shipment that costs me $37 (Canadian).
Okay, so transportation costs cut deeply into my profit margin, but I'm sitting in a room uncluttered by CDs I never listen to with $63 (U.S.) on its way - and I'm still in my jammies.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

138/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

THURSDAY
Entering my fourth day in virtual isolation, there are two developments: I'm now holding extended conversations with myself and I'm beginning to smell. Personal care suffers greatly
when you're not in public. Bad breath is perfectly acceptable. Morning showers are optional.
Not all of it is voluntary. I'm out of hair care products and deodorant and toiletries are tough to find online .
Stores like Shoppers Drug Mart don't offer online ordering, so I end up in the Bay's upscale personal hygiene department. The over-priced Paul Mitchell shampoo and conditioner are
bad enough, but motivated by a stench that offends even me, I place an online order for a $14 stick of deodorant.
Before now, I didn't know there was such a thing.
I decide my failing judgment is a sign of mind-altering isolation so I look through the conversation rooms of cyberspace for human contact.
There are chat groups on any imaginable topic aimed at any demographic: religion in schools, Ricky Martin, Scandinavian nudism and Jewish teen talk. As consolation for the beer
night with friends I had to turn down, I head to "Guy Talk" hoping to find some good old-fashioned man talk.
"How's it going?" I ask Joe from San Francisco, one of many friendly participants who send me a welcome message.
"Not bad. Do you like sex?"
I respond. Eventually I discover this is a chat room for gay men.
FRIDAY
My conversations with myself are turning into heated arguments.
"That's a stupid sentence. Learn how to write," I snap.
"Whatever. Shut up," I reply.
I'm e-mailing people I lost touch with years ago, hoping for a glint of outside contact.
There's no response.
Colleagues at the office who get my e-mail missives are equally dismissive, sending back snippets like this: "Nothing to report here. All is the same. Good luck."
There is some good news . My shampoo and remarkably small stick of $14 deodorant just arrived by courier.
By now, I'm not that interested in having a shower and I've grown to like my odour. It's kind of fruity.
As well, I've just received a six-pack of beer, two wine bottles and more groceries I ordered yesterday, anticipating an anti-depressive gorging.
Since I can't get friends or colleagues to communicate, I decide to pay someone to do it. Love Psychics ( www .lovepsychics.com [http://www.lovepsychics.com/]) "use the new
millennium's technology to beam the wisdom of the ages into your home or office."
I'm looking for some wisdom of the ages, or just any contact, right now. I order an e-mail reading about my life, career and future for $75 (U.S.).
The response arrives in my e-mail box from psychic Mary-Anne. "To me, it feels as though you are in a highly ambitious cycle and a feeling of full speed ahead," I read between slurps
of beer. Occasionally, the drink drips through my four-day beard and on to my already filthy shirt.
"There is so much movement here in this reading extending over the next three years that I have to say everything will be set very firm over this period."
I'm starting to feel very close to the mysterious Mary-Anne. She understands the kind of reassurance I'm looking for.
I've learned some things in this wired prison. I've noticed that I work much longer days when there is no division of personal and professional space. Blend them together and I'm in a
16-hour-a-day computer trance.
Extended isolation - even a week - has changed me. I'm more vulnerable, anxious and odd.
I conclude that much of this technology is trying to solve a problem that doesn't really exist. While it sometimes offers convenience, it more often charges a high price, both financial and
social. Another week of this, and I'll need to find an online shrink.
WIRED SHUT: For five days, Star reporter Robert Cribb must get everything he needs - food, information, social contact - without leaving his apartment. ORDER: Reporter Robert Cribb's $72 grocery
order, delivered by Noy Elimeleh, left, arrived the next day. It was missing a dozen items that were out of stock, including yogurt, bagels and milk.
Document tor0000020010830dvbm0167g

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

139/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

E-COMMERCE
Report on Business: Technology

Canadians cast Net on rough seas Domestic retailers are starting to set sail on the Internet. But smaller sites still have to
navigate a stormy route to profits.
Mark Evans

3296 words
15 July 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

The hottest trend in retailing is electronic commerce. So why do Canadian merchants have such a tepid presence on the Internet ?
There are plenty of homegrown Web sites peddling their products and services on-line, but there is a troubling lack of retailers who are truly capitalizing on the growing interest among
consumers in cyberspace shopping.
The small group of well-known, successful retail sites trawling the Internet for business is largely confined to companies such as Toronto-based book retailers Chapters.ca and Indigo
Online Inc. and auction house Bid.Com International Inc. of Mississauga.
But there is an increasing number of small, nimble players in Canada who are not household names, but are using the Web to pitch their products to millions of consumers -- without
ever putting mortar to brick.
Companies such as Videoflicks.com Inc., which sells VHS and DVD videos over the Web, are taking aim at the broad consumer market. And then there are specialized players such as
OnLine Film Services Inc., whose Web site offers casting directors a database of actors' faces and resumes, and easy access to their agents.
Perhaps the biggest challenge for these companies is building a higher profile to capture the attention of consumers. Many retailers have built good "stores," but need to let consumers
know that they are open for business.
Jim Carroll, co-author of the 1999 Canadian Internet Handbook, discovered the dismal track records of Canadian retailers while researching a new book on how to sell on-line, which
will be published in September. "We looked for Canadian stores [on-line], but we could barely find any," he said.
Mr. Carroll said Web retailing has been more successful in the United States than Canada because there is more of a catalogue-shopping mentality south of the border.
Companies such as Freeport, Maine-based L.L. Bean Inc. have long delivered clothing and other products in the mail. So, the migration of the Internet has been a natural one.
Aside from cultural differences, Mr. Carroll blames Canada's mediocre on-line performance on senior executives who still do not appear to comprehend the Internet 's impact and the
urgency that they move now or be left far behind.
"I am still finding a huge lack of understanding at the management level and a bigger degree of skepticism than in the U.S," he said.
Dean Hopkins, president and chief executive officer with CyberPlex Inc. in Toronto, said one major reason that Canadian retailers have not thrived on-line is a lack of merchandising
skills. A common mistake, he said, is the use of the same marketing techniques used in the real world.
"In a store, you have product that is laid out and nicely packaged," he said. "On-line, you get a little picture and a description, and it's very unappealing."
To succeed, Mr. Hopkins said, retailers must use a combination of better prices, a broad product assortment and detailed information about total purchase price when hidden costs
such as shipping are included.
On the upside, Chapters.ca has been aggressively advertising its Web site, playing up the advantages of shopping in Canada in Canadian prices rather than using U.S. rivals such as
Amazon.com., which charge U.S. dollars and force the consumer to pay duties.
Mr. Carroll said Chapters.ca is moving quickly because the Internet and consumers reward pioneers who move into a category and attempt to dominate it.
"Whoever is first wins, being second is no good," he said. "That's the attitude Chapters is taking."
And there are indications that other retailers are slowly venturing onto the Internet , although at a snail's pace. A survey released this week by Ernst & Young Canada Services Inc. and
IAB Canada found that more retailers are using the Internet to advertise -- but they are still mostly trying to channel consumers to brick-and-mortar stores. ITAL FLORIST LTD.,
TORONTO
On-line florist
Founded: May, 1997
Revenue: $50,000 in last 12 months Like many on-line retailers, Italo Paris isn't too stressed that he hasn't yet hit the jackpot with the Internet -based part of his business.
Mr. Paris, owner of Ital Florist says the key thing at this point is to establish a strong on-line presence because E-commerce in the floral industry is expected to blossom over the next
few years. While some big competitors and bunches of smaller companies are expected to enter the on-line floral field, Mr. Paris's family-owned operation can't afford to lose money on
the Internet . But on-line revenue has so far exceeded the company's $23,000 investment.
Mr. Paris, who garners most of his business from a shop in the Toronto suburb of Etobicoke, says he's earned about $50,000 on-line over the last 12 months and expects to post his
first profit -- about $5,000 -- from the Internet this year.
"It's not a huge money maker at this point," says Mr. Paris.
The family plans to reinvest another $20,000 or so in their on-line business in the coming months, including the addition of about 300 more images of floral combinations.
But the Web site will remain simple with an accent on functionality, says Mr. Paris. Relying on a pedestrian design and easy access to a wide range of floral options, it includes free
virtual flowers and special arrangements for anniversaries, holidays, weddings or any other occasion. The company also uses E-mail to remind customers about upcoming special
occasions.
Mr. Paris says the best thing about his company's on-line operation is that it's simple and focussed. "You can't buy books on my site -- you buy flowers," he says. "You're not going to
find travel tips and you're not going to find the weather." GARDENCRAZY.COM LTD., SAINT-TIMOTHE, Que.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

140/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Internet garden centre that sells plants, seeds and tools, and offers free advice
Founded: July, 1998 (began on-line nursery April, 1999)
Revenue: n/a GardenCrazy bills itself as Canada's first E-commerce site devoted solely to gardening. As nesting baby boomers develop green thumbs en masse, GardenCrazy's
creation of a virtual nursery is well-timed.
Visitors will find lots to pique their interest. The on-line catalogue describes more than 8,000 plants and products from a growing list of suppliers, currently at 46 vendors. GardenCrazy's
site includes a weekly advice column, promotional contests and links. In return for registering on the company's database, customers receive free wildflower seeds by courier.
GardenCrazy's three partners grew up together and their passion for gardening was nurtured by co-founder Melanie Hyland, whose family owns a nursery near the Montreal suburb of
Valleyfield, Que.
GardenCrazy won't disclose its sales for its first three months, but the company has registered more than 25,000 prospective customers. Live plants are shipped by courier in specially
designed containers to almost anywhere in North America.
"The great thing about the Internet as a business medium is that we're not limited to a street corner," says Mr. Villeneuve, pointing to orders GardenCrazy received from a customer in
the tiny outport of Francois, Nfld.
Pollster Angus Reid recently recognized GardenCrazy as one of Canada's top Web sites. In addition to startup financing from a Montreal-based venture capitalist and government
support, GardenCrazy carries advertising to support its Web site and expects to be profitable by the end of 2001.
ONLINE FILM SERVICES INC., VANCOUVER
On-line casting service
Founded: 1994
Revenue: $1.3-million (projected for this fiscal year) OnLine Film Services is trying out for the role of Hollywood's electronic casting agent.
The company has developed Casting Workbook, Internet -based communications software that allows casting directors to look at thousands of actors' faces and resumes with the click
of a mouse, and then communicate with agents over a secure network. Founded five years ago, the company now boasts a stable of more than 10,000 actors.
The software has helped actors land parts in such television productions as The X-Files, The Outer Limits, Traders, and Millennium and films such as The Virginian and My Five Wives.
"We set out to improve the traditional way in which the casting process took place and to make it much more efficient," said Aerock Fox, OnLine 's president and co-founder. "Every
day in Toronto, a dumpster load of paper used to change hands."
In an industry famous for making stars out of those who are in the right place at the right time, OnLine 's service should help level the playing field for aspiring actors who don't happen
to live in an entertainment mecca. The Web site itself is attractive and informative, but requires registration for first-time visitors.
Another attraction for casting directors, studios and agents is that the service is free, while actors are charged $42 a year for posting a resume, photos, and video clips. The model is
different from many E-commerce ventures because it doesn't rely on on-line advertising for revenue.
SIKAMAN GOLD RESOURCES LTD., PORT PERRY, ONT.
All-Canadian Internet shopping mall.
Founded: June, 1999
Revenue: Too early to tell Sikaman Gold Resources is a mining company that decided to listen to its shareholders and get into the Internet business.
After shopping around, executives at the company decided that Norstarmall was "head and shoulders ahead of the pack," according to Sikaman chief executive officer Paul
Romanchuk. Sikaman bought Norstarmall for about $1-million in stock, an investment Mr. Romanchuk says will start generating a profit by December.
The site is clearly geared toward Canadian shoppers, offering prices in Canadian dollars (Mr. Romanchuk says there are no "hidden costs") and presenting a large list of homegrown
Web merchants. In all, about 140 vendors lease space in the on-line mall, ranging from Dell Computer Corp. to Chapters Inc.
One of the key attractions is the site's design. When Web users click on the main browser, they are brought into the mall through the opening of another browser. From there they can
select different shopping areas, such as automotive or computer, or search for a particular product. When users want to enter a store, they click on the store and open a new browser
window. The design allows users to enter and leave stores by simply opening and closing windows.
Another feature is the site's search engine. Type in a product, such as "teddy bear," and a list of stores carrying teddy bears comes up. Click on a particular store and you don't simply
go to that store's home page, you go directly to where you can buy the product.
Norstarmall makes money by leasing space in the virtual mall, getting sales commissions and selling banner ads.
Sikaman has begun advertising on several Internet service provider sites and the sports site TSN.ca. A radio and television ad campaign is scheduled in late August to catch the backto-school and return-to-work shopping crowd. VIDEOFLICKS.COM INC., TORONTO
Video merchant that sells VHS and DVD releases
Founded: July, 1995
Revenue: $1.24-million (U.S.) for nine months ended May 31 Videoflicks' first video sale was to a Swedish Internet surfer in the summer of 1995. Since then, the site has grown into a
million-dollar business that receives more than 14 million hits a month.
TopTenLinks.com, an independent Internet survey firm, recently named the site one of the Top 5 video merchants on the Web, next to players such as Amazon.com and Reel.com.
As the on-line sister of Videoflicks' 30 rental video stores that are scattered throughout Southern Ontario, the site has grown so far without help from advertising. But Michael
Kavanagh, president and chief executive officer, plans to change that. Last month he announced an Internet -based ad campaign that's expected to last a year and cost as much as
$7-million (U.S.).
The company was profitable before it went public on the Canadian Dealing Network, but development costs due to rapid growth put it back in the red. Mr. Kavanagh says that once the
company gets to a certain size, he'll trim back advertising and development costs and focus on making money. He expects that day will come in a year or two.
The slick site is well structured, searchable by title or actor, and offers movie reviews. The whole venture is supported by 12 order takers, seven site programmers, five product shippers
and three administation staff.
Mr. Kavanagh says his edge over competitors comes from a strong focus on customer service. "All the staff are movie buffs, all the way from people taking the orders to the shippers."
PLACES4RENT INC., RED DEER, ALTA.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

141/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

A "rental portal" for more than 150 North American cities
Founded: November, 1998
Revenue: Marginal Places4rent aims to take advantage of a growing number of mobile professionals in North America looking for a place to settle down.
The site's owner, Brent Daviduck, is a computer-science instructor at a local college. Places4Rent began as a student project, and Mr. Daviduck has since spent many hours
developing what he calls a "one-stop shop" for those looking to rent or fill a vacancy. The investment so far? Only $3,000.
Mr. Daviduck compiles his own content from information submitted to the site by landlords and rental seekers, but the service also provides links to other rental services.
The site is still in startup phase, in need of more content and exposure. It's design is also rather primitive, but Mr. Daviduck says the whole venture is a work in progress, getting finetuned every day.
He's currently negotiating to have the rental classifieds of nearly 40 Canadian newspapers brought to the site, and said it won't be long before U.S. papers participate. As an added
value, each listed city has links to movers, truck and furniture rental places, and storage facilities.
Revenue is expected to come from a combination of banner advertising, charges for permanent vacancy listings, and revenue-sharing agreements with partners. The site already has
some banner ads and is getting over 200,000 visits a month, though it isn't expected to make a profit for a year or two. EDEAL SERVICE CORP., TORONTO
On-line auction business
Founded: 1998
Revenue: projecting $1.3-million (U.S.) in 1999 While Bid.Com International Inc. may be Canada's best-known on-line auction house, Edeal Service is quietly establishing itself as a
vibrant player.
Edeal was founded last year by Colin Webster, the son of the late high-tech entrepreneur Ben Webster, and software developer Leon Kuperman. The plan is to tap into the growing
popularity of consumer-to-consumer markets as people seek new ways to make cash by selling unwanted belongings.
Shortly after starting, Edeal received some welcome publicity from a free service on its Web site called the Computer Evaluator. It lets people find out the value of their computers by
entering their machine's specifications on-line. The service demonstrates some of the Edeal's core tenets: strong customer service and ease of use.
"The features of our sites are shaped by what the customers wants, which is a refreshing change from users who have gone to the conglomerate Web sites where they are treated like
numbers," Mr. Kuperman says.
Mr. Kuperman's not-so-subtle jabs at rivals such as Ebay Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. reflect Edeal's pesky business approach.
The company has 13,000 registered users and more than 4,000 items for sale, which include everything from motorcyles to Beanie Babies and sports memorabilia. Edeal expects to
break even on revenue of $12-million (U.S.) in 2000.
Edeal hopes to encourage customer loyalty. For every dollar of sales or purchases, customers will receive a loyalty point. Mr. Kuperman said the Top 1,000 customers will earn the right
to buy into Edeal's public offering next year. BUYBUDDY INC., TORONTO
Comparative shopping service
Founded: December, 1998
Revenue: n/a
Unlike many Internet companies in Canada, Buybuddy is not having a problem attracting investors.
The brains behind the shopping engine site are Albert Lai, Michael Furdyk and Michael Hayman, who recently made more than $1.5-million selling www .mydesktop.com
[http://www.mydesktop.com/] to Internet .com LLC.
The three young men -- aged between 16 and 20 -- hope to enjoy as much success with Buybuddy, a free service that lets consumers find the best deals on computer equipment. They
expect to extend the service to books, music and videos this year.
Mr. Furdyk said Buybuddy aims to break out of the shopping engine crowd by offering the most up-to-date prices and information.
For example, if you are interesting in buying a blueberry-coloured iMac, Buybuddy offers a short description of the computer and lists two retailers. If the price is too high, Buybuddy lets
consumers set a price and notifies them through E-mail if it falls.
Mr. Furdyk said Buybuddy employees will scour the Internet for the best deals in each category -- rather than have a computer program gather information automatically. Like auction
house eBay Inc., Buybuddy will make its money by commissions gained linking buyers and sellers.
Mr. Furdyk said the Web site's revenue has jumped 50 per cent a month since launching in March.
Mr. Lai said the company is profitable and will soon complete its first round of financing with a U.S. venture capital firm. MEDICONSULT.COM INC., HAMILTON, BERMUDA
Medical advice and health information service
Founded: July, 1996
Revenue: $700,000 (U.S.), in first quarter 1999 A doctor is always available to make Web calls on Mediconsult's site. The brainchild of a Canadian surgeon, Mediconsult grew out of a
Web site launched in early 1996 by Montreal urologist Dr. Michel Bazinet to provide free information about prostate cancer. Within six months, Dr. Bazinet decided to build a business
from his idea because of the demand for on-line medical information.
Mediconsult has since blossomed, providing consumers with free medical information -- including news , summaries of journal articles, drug and research information and access to
support groups -- on over 100 diseases and conditions. Mediconsult says its site had more than five million visits (although not necessarily that many individuals) in the first three
months of 1999.
Mediconsult's strategy goes beyond advertising-supported services to encompass on-line sales of health products, licencing arrangements to health care institutions -- and a fee-based
consultation service.
The company's MediXpert.com service allows a customer to select a specialist in one of more than 70 fields and, for $195 (U.S.) for each consultation, obtain a personal report on
treatment options within five days. Since the patient's identity is confidential, and the doctor does not treat him or her, the service is designed for people who are about to be treated by
their own specialist and want an opinion sooner.
Despite a first-quarter loss of $1.9-million, Mediconsult expects to be profitable by the end of this year. With a war chest of $65-million from its recent initial public offering and a listing
on the Nasdaq Stock Market, Mediconsult is busily acquiring other medical Web sites.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

142/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv7f010qf

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

143/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Santa nice to on-line retailers --- Yule e-sales on track to top great expectations
Derek Caney
658 words
28 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
BU02
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

NEW YORK - Santa Claus treated on-line retailers pretty well this Christmas, with Internet spending exceeding expectations for the holiday season, according to early estimates.
Market research firm Forrester Research Inc. estimated before the season started that revenue from Internet retailers between U.S. Thanksgiving on Nov. 25 and Christmas would
total $4 billion (U.S).
"It now looks like the season will exceed our expectations ," analyst Evie Dykema said yesterday.
The company has no figures for last year's holiday season, but she noted that e-retailer revenues in the fourth quarter would total in excess of $8 billion, more than revenues for all of
1998.
Internet retailing has "become a much more mature channel for business," Dykema said. "Clearly you have more Internet users online . But we also have retailers who understood
the spike in demand and have developed the means for fulfilling them."
In the week ended Dec. 19, the number of visitors to electronic commerce sites jumped 37 per cent from the same week a year earlier, according to research firm Media Metrix.
"What strikes me most of all is the variety of shopping sites that you see now," said Doug McFarland, senior vice-president and general manager of Media Metrix. "It looks like a
shopping mall out there with Sears, Wal-Mart, Victoria's Secret and Eddie Bauer all with successful Web sites."
He also attributed some of the growth to the increase in advertising by e-retailers.
"You couldn't turn on the radio or TV without getting bombarded with advertising for Web sites."
He said that while newer sites such as privately held Buy.com and ToysRUs.com saw the fastest growth in traffic this year, the overwhelming winner of the season was Amazon.com.
Traffic to Amazon.com in the week ended Dec. 19 totalled an average of nearly 7 million daily visitors, double the amount of last year, Media Metrix said.
Amazon, which began as bookseller in 1995, expanded this year into home improvement items, toys, software and video games.
The company has yet to turn a quarterly profit.
"Amazon moved into a leadership position in the toy category, as ToysRUs stopped shipping and fell short of meeting consumers' expectations ," Forrester's Dykema said.
"Amazon extended into quite a few categories quite successfully."
An Amazon.com spokesperson would not specify revenues or orders for the 1999 holiday season against last year, except to say that sales on the Friday following U.S. Thanksgiving
were 2 1/2 times that of a year earlier.
Dykema called Toys R US Inc.'s failure "a major embarrassment this year."
The company said overwhelming volume prevented it from processing and fulfilling orders placed before Dec. 10, its deadline for Christmas delivery by standard shipping.
Media network Yahoo Inc. said yesterday that orders between U.S. Thanksgiving and Christmas from its shopping site, which has links to its retail partners, rose 385 per cent from the
year-earlier period.
"In the five days between Dec. 13 and Dec, 17, (Yahoo's shopping site) processed more orders than the during the entire holiday shopping season in 1998," Yahoo said.
The shopping site of Number 1 Internet access company America Online Inc. saw its first-time users double to 2 million from last year, spokesperson Wendy Goldberg said. "It was a
very successful holiday season for us," she said.
But it looks as though the on-line music industry, grappling with concerns over digital formats, piracy and technical woes, will have to wait until next year for Santa to deliver.
Web music is still largely confined to the tech-savvy crowd, despite early predictions of blockbuster holiday sales.
WEB WONDERLAND: Eddie Bauer's Web site and other on-line firms probably pulled in $4 billion (U.S.) in sales between U.S. Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Document tor0000020010830dvcs01b6n

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

144/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Famous moments you may have missed
The Toronto Star
1095 words
7 October 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Net.column
K.K. Campbell
To me, this is the Web at its best: A way to get data you'll never get from magazines and newspapers - because they don't have the interest or the space to run it all.
The Smoking Gun ( www .thesmokinggun.com [http://www.thesmokinggun.com/]) is a "Web magazine/archive" housing fascinating documents about famous moments in modern
history. The site has digitally scanned copies of secret, weird and just funny official documents. The material is obtained through via Freedom of Information requests, traditional
sources inside law enforcement and government and court records.
This New York City-based e-zine is the brainchild of William Bastone, 38, and Daniel Green, 36. Bastone is a staff writer at the Village Voice and is a noted organized crime investigator.
Green is also a journalist . Bastone often comes across curious documents - things newsworthy, historically interesting or just plain strange.
"But there was no real place to put them in traditional newspapers ," Green says. "Our editors weren't going to give us seven pages to lay out an FBI report we dug up. The editor will
summarize it in half a column."
They thought that process always lost something in the translation. It's a different experience when one sees the actual thing, sees the FBI CONFIDENTIAL stamp and hand-scrawled
notes in the margins.
Take the case of slain 6-year-old beauty queen JonBenet Ramsey. "You can read a transcription of the ransom letter the killer of the little girl left there," Greens says. "But, when you
can look at the ransom note, you get a much more powerful sense of who might have written it.
"One of the most powerful documents in the archive, for me, was the actual distress signal sent by the radio room of the Titanic. That was chilling for me - a lot more chilling than the
movie was."
So, in 1996, Bastone and Green decided to make an online magazine. They didn't know much about the Web so had to ease into it. It was up by April, 1997: a small site with four
documents. The very first one was a previously unpublished FBI memo concerning Elvis Presley's drug addiction, from a few years before his death.
They now register around 60,000 page views a day - which is pretty substantial for an enterprise without any capital outlay.
But then, conspiracy stuff has always been big online . Users have been swapping UFO reports and JFK evidence longer than "nekkid people pictures."
Do these UFO watchers and Dealy Plaza detectives contact the Smoking Gun? "On a daily basis," Green says. "People ask if we'll prove the Mafia killed Kennedy."
Surf on over and learn. From the political files:
John Lennon: For 14 years, California history professor Jon Wiener fought to force the FBI to fork over its files on the ex-Beatle. He finally won (and the FBIand agreed to pay $204,000
in legal fees Wiener incurred). Among other things, the FBI believed Lennon was going to disrupt the 1972 Republican National Convention.
Jackie Robinson: The first black man to play baseball in the major leagues. He's now on U.S. postage stamps, but the FBI thought he was a threat - after all, he once attended a labour
rally and sat as a member of the board of directors of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People.
Timothy Leary: After escaping from prison and escaping to Algeria, Afghanistan and Switzerland, the fugitive Harvard doctor was nabbed and returned home. In order to get out of jail,
he agreed to give the FBI details of his escape accomplices in the Weatherman Underground.
From the online files:
Kiddie porn: You hear so much about online child pornographers. But you never get details on what they do and how they operate in e-mail. Now's your chance. Here's the FBI file on
one AOL user charged with child pornography. Excerpts from a bureau affidavit show how undercover FBI Agent Kent Hush could "talk the talk."
Web snorts: Online auction site eBay was hoaxed. Someone put up for auction a "$2 million cocaine stash." On June 13, 1999, Item No. 117214617 went up by someone claiming to
live in Hollywood: "We're selling Pure, Uncut Cocaine." There was a nice little picture of the coke, too. Supposedly took eBay 18 hours to pull it. The Smoking Gun got a screen capture,
to memorialize the great advance for world e-commerce.
Bill Gates: See a real mugshot of Bill Gates - ah, if only to let Netscape execs dream a little longer before the Microsoft antitrust suit in Washington, D.C., winds up. The Smoking Gun
has the 1977 New Mexico accident report. Albuquerque resident Geraldine Evans "surely had no idea who she was plowing into with her 1971 Chevy. Those two nerds in the green
Porsche were Microsoft founders Bill Gates (at the wheel) and Paul Allen."
From the court documents:
Creative Marketing 101: The Smoking Gun occasionally leafs through name change ledgers at local courthouses. "Usually, we find someone named Lipschitz petitioning to change
their handle to something less tragic. But down in North Carolina, 28-year-old Jennifer Briggs just changed her name in a strictly commercial transaction. As part of a Star Wars
promotion sponsored by a local radio station, Briggs got $1,000 to change her name to Obi-Wan Kenobi Briggs." The Smoking Gun says it'll pay her another grand to change it to
www .thesmokinggun [http://www.thesmokinggun/].
com Briggs. "You know where to reach us, Obi-Wan." Read some of the court papers Briggs filed.
Creative Marketing 102: A New York ad agency specializing in the kids market came up with a real Darren Stevens idea. For a cute market launch, dozens of CEOs were sent
packages containing a "ransom note" and a small gift. Thinking his kids might be at risk, the CEO of Chicago's William Wrigley Co. called in the FBI. The bureau's probe included a
"linguistic review" of the ransom note - probably written by an educated woman, it concluded. "After about 10 days, as these memos show, the FBI figured out that the notes were only
an advertising gimmick."
--K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

145/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

SLICES OF HISTORY: The Smoking Gun "Web magazine/archive" features such documents as a "$2 million cocaine stash" at auction site eBay, and note left by the killer of 6-year-old JonBenet
Ramsey.
Document tor0000020010830dva7011ey

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

146/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

Jetsonian government Canada's public sector is moving to create electronic services that George Jetson would recognize,
but security issues and that pesky millennium bug threaten to hinder its move into the 21st century
TYLER HAMILTON

2624 words
14 January 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Toronto -- It may be a matter of keeping up with the Jetsons, but the head of a Canadian think tank says the demand for cheaper and better public services is forcing world
governments -- including Canada -- to rethink what they do and how they do it.
The "old ways" of government, says Don Tapscott, author of Growing Up Digital and The Digital Economy, are proving incompatible with the workings of the new economy. Clearly,
the concept of "citizen as customer" conflicts with the long lines, limited hours and frustrating pace associated with the public-sector bureaucracy of the 20th century.
In Canada, that reality has been acknowledged in the federal government's "Blueprint for Renewing Government Services Using Information Technology," in which Ottawa has admitted
that "government increasingly appears to be out of date."
To tackle this image problem, it has begun several major initiatives that, when complete, will give citizens the option of sending income tax returns, receiving bills and registering
trademarks from a home Internet connection. There appears to be no limit to the number of electronic services that could ultimately be pumped through this network of networks.
Still, they won't become available overnight.
As the public sector fights to stay relevant at a time when 24-hour service -- when and where I want it -- is the unyielding trend, it must first overcome such issues as privacy, security,
and that pesky year 2000 computer bug, which continues to drain scarce financial resources.
But the technocrats soldier on, confident that the foundation they lay today will be solid enough for E-democracy in the 21st century.
"They're trying to align service delivery the way the customer [citizen] would like to receive it, instead of the way the government is organized," says Ross Hutchison, an Oakville, Ont.based consultant who collects market research on federal and provincial technology initiatives.
Canada is not alone in this respect.
Washington is currently hosting a international conference on "reinventing government," where Mr. Tapscott, chairman of the Toronto-based Alliance For Converging Technologies,
plans to invite business and political leaders from 35 countries to take part in a program called Governance in the Digital Economy.
The initiative is being billed as an 18-month brainstorm session, where some of the world's top minds will try to answer the question: What kind of governments do citizens need in the
21st -- and first all- digital -- century?
One of the sponsors of the program is the Canadian government, whose actions in this area are considered by many to be a benchmark for other countries.
Industry Canada has led Ottawa's Internet crusade.
Small- and medium-sized businesses flock to the department's Strategis Web site to gain access to more than three million documents containing trade, regulatory and economic
information.
Strategis continues to be the largest information site in Canada, and has plans to soon begin charging fees for enhanced services -- such as filing for patents, registering for bankruptcy
and purchasing licences. In November, the department contracted Montreal-based Mpact Immedia Corp. (since renamed BCE Emergis Inc.) to build Strategis's E-commerce
infrastructure.
"Industry Canada is probably the leader in this area, given that [Industry Minister John] Manley us heading up Canada's E-commerce strategy," says Michel Cesar, senior manager of
E-commerce for the public sector at Deloitte Consulting in Ottawa.
Industry Canada's lead is being closely followed by sister departments in the federal system.
Revenue Canada continues to experiment with the electronic filing of income tax returns, and Crown corporation Canada Post Corp. is close to turning the country's snail-mail system
into a national electronic postal service.
"In many respects, the government is starting to take the lead," says Miles Faulkner, a partner at the Toronto office of Ernst & Young who heads up its electronic commerce services
division.
"The Canada Post project is an example of that. They have some forward-thinking minds and really top-notch E-commerce people."
Since 1996, Canada Post has participated in international studies on the future of mail, chatted with customers, conducted surveys and investigated technology, all as part of a major
plan to take its postal service to the Internet .
"What we're doing has really never been done on this scale before," says Bill Robertson, general manager of electronic services at Canada Post.
When the service launches in June, businesses will be able to issue electronic cheques directly to employees' homes. Hydro, telephone and cable companies will also save money by
sending electronic bills.
For the public, access to the mail will be as simple as calling up a Web site and punching in a password. Once inside the system, users can set up preferences, which might mean
requesting cheques electronically, bills by fax and personal letters through the traditional postal system.
"I've talked to over 50 of the largest companies in Canada at the senior decision-making level. I can tell you, without exception, that every one of them is looking at how they're going to
do electronic delivery," Mr. Robertson explains.
"There appears to be a very strong demand, and that's going to be fuelled by consumer demand. Our belief is that the earliest adopters will be people who today are doing PC
banking."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

147/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Canada Post has been working with Cebra Inc., the electronic commerce unit of Bank of Montreal. Public-private partnerships of this sort are increasingly becoming a way for
governments to find both the skills and, in some cases, financial backing necessary to carry these projects through.
Over at Revenue Canada, however, most of the work is being done in-house as the nation's collector of taxes prepares to take its business to the Internet . Two services offered today
are precursors to this move.
E-file, which has been available for five years, allows for the electronic delivery of T1 income-tax forms, but only third parties such as accounting firms are able to submit them.
For very basic returns, three-year-old Tele-file lets people enter their tax return information through the keypad of a phone.
"We eliminate the middle data entry steps because the person is doing it themselves," says Elaine Collins, director of special processing at Revenue Canada. "And because they're
using the software, there's less of a chance they'll make an error."
But Ms. Collins says there's plenty of room for improvement.
Of the 11 million people who process their returns using software, three million decide to print and mail them. Another three million let a tax preparer, such as H & R Block Inc., do the
printing and mailing. The remaining five million let an authorized E-file agent send their returns electronically.
That means a total of six million T1s are turned into data but not sent through E-file, while another 11 million are still prepared by pen.
"Our next step is moving to the Internet , allowing individuals to file their returns by accessing our Web site," says Ms. Collins, adding that the convenience of the free-of-charge service
may convince people to throw away their pens.
This tax season, 1,000 Revenue Canada employees will take part in a pilot project to test personal filing over the Internet . If the trial works, Ms. Collins says, the department will
expand it to a select group of municipalities or a province, a move that will "give us a chance to get our feet wet" before national rollout in 2001.
She says Internet filing, once it gets going, will eventually becoming a two-way service. Tax refunds could be issued electronically, perhaps to a Canada Post electronic mailbox. As
well, inquiries could handled by Internet -enabled call centres and tax adjustments could be instantly performed while on-line.
Interacting with the government with such ease and flexibility is sure to be applauded by time-strapped citizens -- at least those with computers -- but for both Canada Post and
Revenue Canada, the sensitive nature of the documents being processed raises privacy and security concerns.
"Unless I'm sure there's some security in place, I'm not sure I'm going to file it," says Deloitte's Mr. Cesar. "A priority for the government of Canada right now is to lay down a security
infrastructure to enable electronic commerce."
That security is called the public key infrastructure, or PKI, which allows information to be encoded so unauthorized eyes can't view it. The federal government has chosen Entrust
Technologies Inc., a spinoff of Northern Telecom Ltd., as its electronic security provider, but getting that infrastructure in place and creating the policies to support it are taking some
time.
The waiting has made it difficult for government departments to make any major move to the Internet , because citizens are unlikely to use electronic services that put their privacy at
risk.
The same problem applies to the provincial governments.
"If you're going down this road of the Internet , you have to ace the security issue," says Scott Cambpell, chairman of the Information Technology Strategy Project Steering Committee
for the Ontario government.
Mr. Campbell oversees many of the technology initiatives coming out of Queen's Park. He says the potential for privacy violation is greater these days because computers represent a
central place in which information is stored and organized, making it easier for thieves to target the data they're after.
"In the old days, everything was so disorganized that you couldn't find it anyway. In the electronic world, because the information is more structured, it's much easier to find it and link it
all together."
Ontario, following in the footsteps of Ottawa, has also chosen Entrust Technologies of Richardson, Tex., as its security provider. The province will spend this year testing Entrust's
product, which will be a necessary part of several related technology projects.
One mammoth project is aimed at creating a pool of electronic information for the Ontario justice system, which could help prevent the type of bungled investigation associated with
convicted murderer Paul Bernardo.
Toronto police were criticized for not properly organizing and sharing information they collected on the Scarborough rapist with Niagara Regional Police during its investigation into the
sex slayings of Lesley Mahaffy and Kristen French.
The new system, at an estimated cost of $190-million, will link computer systems used by the courts, police, prosecutors and correctional facilities so information -- otherwise kept
separate -- can be more easily and quickly accessed.
"This is confidential information, and while we want to ensure proper information is shared, we want to make sure that which shouldn't be shared isn't," explains project director Ailsa
Hamilton.
A similar effort is taking place in Ontario's health care system. The plan is for computers, data bases and telecommunications networks to become integrated so patient information can
be shared between hospitals and health care professionals.
Such initiatives can create a level of efficiency never before experienced in government circles -- assuming the projects in question don't die from mismanagement.
That's what happened in New Brunswick in April, 1997, when the plug was pulled on a $60-million integrated justice project because of what many have called a lack of communication
between the provincial government and its private sector partner, Andersen Consulting.
The two sides argued over the scope and cost of the project, which seemed to change on a regular basis. Eventually, the New Brunswick government decided to bail out, and as a
result, agreed to pay a $2.9-million cancellation fee to Andersen.
The federal government, meanwhile, isn't without its own communication problems. Mr. Cesar attributes these to the autonomy Ottawa gives its departments, which are able to carry
out their own technology projects independent of any national co-ordination.
"I see a lot of isolated efforts, but I don't see an overall strategy," Mr. Cesar says. "It's been fairly ad hoc at this point."
Each department must also deal independently with the year 2000 problem, which has been sucking up resources that could otherwise go towards Internet -related initiatives.
"That's one of the main barriers right now," Mr. Cesar says.
The Treasury Board Secretariat has made it clear that the nearly $2-billion it could cost to exterminate the year 2000 bug from Canada's government computer systems must come out
of existing departmental budgets.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

148/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Stan Peck, a research director at International Data Corp. (Canada) Ltd., says this has forced departments to either scrap low-priority projects or simply put new initiatives on hold until
the issue has been dealt with.
Mr. Hutchison, the consultant, adds that any modest budget increases have been driven more by year 2000 than by the creation of new services. "Year 2000 is not an investment, it's a
matter of staying alive."
Still, he predicts that once the government sees itself safely standing and breathing in the new millennium, there will be an explosion in electronic services.
"I believe there will be a major upturn in providing electronic delivery services once the year 2000 snowball is behind everybody."
Ultimately, however, public acceptance will be what either makes or breaks the government's move to the Internet . As Mr. Campbell points out, it's dangerous to assume that every
Canadian wants to be a George, Jane, Judy or Elroy Jetson, willing to abandon the comfort of things familiar for the convenience of things digital .
"Just because you and I might be committed to a technology-enabled government, it by no means tells us that a majority of the population are convinced of that. They may look at this
and say, 'That's nice, but I don't want do anything over the Internet , thank you very much.' "
Site seeing
www .strategis.ca [http://www.strategis.ca/] www .rc.gc.ca [http://www.rc.gc.ca/] www .canadapost.ca [http://www.canadapost.ca/]
WHERE THEY'RE AT
Here's a sampling of electronic service projects in operation or in development across the country. Ross Hutchison, an Oakville, Ont.-based consultant who does market research into
federal and provincial technology initiatives, says most of these projects aim to create a "single window" over the Internet so citizens don't have to spend time visiting different
government departments and offices.
New Brunswick is developing an "enterprise and person registry," which, among other things, lets citizens register land and property, file for student aid and driver's licences, and make
property tax payments.
Quebec is trying to create a "social-health telecommunications network," which will connect at least 600 establishments in the health and social services sector and 18 regional
ministries. Eventually, the network will be bridged to the Internet and will one day offer telemedicine, video conferencing and even telephone services.
Ontario is planning to use the Internet to provide information about land and properties that will be based on standardized provincial, municipal and federal data. It will charge a fee for
this.
Alberta currently provides a single-window registry service through a private partner. Albertans can use the service as a land, property and corporate registry, and can file for motorvehicle licences and search for vital statistics on the province.
British Columbia already has a one-stop business registration, developed by the Ministry of Small Business, Tourism and Culture. It's a computer system that lets business owners
simultaneously register with federal, provincial and municipal agencies. The information in this registry is then shared with Revenue Canada, the B.C. Workers' Compensation Board
and other relevant bodies across all levels of government.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv1e001ul

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

149/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

E-shopping trickles into mainstream A J.C. Williams study says Canadian on-line retailing lags 12 to 18 months behind the
U.S., but consumers and vendors are set to dive in
MARK EVANS

2341 words
16 September 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

For all the hype surrounding electronic-commerce, Angela Wildman did not make her first purchase on the Internet until a couple of months ago.
But now that she has discovered the convenience of cybershopping, Ms. Wildman says trips to the local mall near her Mississauga home are becoming less frequent -- creating more
time for the homemaker to spend with her two young daughters.
"I would buy almost anything [on-line]," Ms. Wildman says. "It's so much easier than shopping at stores."
Ms. Wildman had been reluctant to shop on the Web until Chapters Inc. gave her a $10 coupon for its on-line store. Many of the best-known E-commerce sites are run by U.S. retailers,
which sell in U.S. dollars and charge shipping and duty costs -- factors that turn off bargain-conscious Canadians.
Ms. Wildman's experience illustrates the immaturity of Canada's electronic-commerce market. Today, Toronto-based J. C. Williams Group, with Los Angeles-based BizRate.com, is
releasing an extensive survey that suggests that the Canadian on-line market lags the United States by 12 to 18 months.
The report paints a statistical picture of the Canadian market's slower development. Key findings include:
-- There are fewer women shoppers, on a percentage basis, on the Internet in Canada (21.7 per cent) than the United States (35.1 per cent);
-- Canadian consumers purchase products and services from a narrower group of retailers;
-- The percentage of first-time buyers in Canada (19.5 per cent) is greater than in the United States (9.5 per cent);
-- U.S. Newspapers and magazines are twice as likely to guide consumers to Web sites.
Even after taking the traditional 10-to-1 ratio to reflect the differences in population, Canada's on-line market has a long way to go.
In the United States, on-line sales are expected to reach $53.8-billion this year, compared with $21.6-billion in 1998 and $5.95-billion in 1997. However, in Canada, sales will climb to
just $1.14-billion this year from $690-million in 1998 and $270-million in 1997. A 11/2-year lag
So why aren't Canadians more active on-line shoppers?
"In general, when it comes to retailers -- whether it's the on-line channel, big-box retailing or new concepts -- the Canadian market tends to lag the U.S.," says David West, an analyst
with J. C. Williams in Toronto.
"In some cases, like big boxes, it was five years, and the Canadian on-line market is probably lagging the U.S. by 11/2 years."
Many of the country's well-known retailers have yet to set up shop in cyberspace, even in categories such as sporting equipment, apparel and hardware that have proved popular in the
United States.
A study done earlier this year by the Retail Council of Canada and IBM Canada Ltd. found that only one-quarter of Canada's top retailers were doing business on-line, compared with
50 per cent south of the border.
Canada's non-starters on the Internet include Canadian Tire Corp. of Toronto, Mountain Equipment Co-op of Vancouver, Dylex Corp. of Toronto, and Mark's Work Wearhouse Ltd. and
Forzani Group Ltd., both of Calgary.
If Canada's largest retailers aren't doing business on-line, that leaves a void in the market and makes it a challenge for smaller, lesser-known retailers to get customers.
"If more retailers had on-line offerings, it would have developed the market sooner," says David Pecaut, who heads the Boston Consulting Group's E-commerce practice in Toronto.
Of course, establishing a site can be costly and complex. Bill Gibson, president of Mountain Equipment Co-op, says some retailers do not see enough financial incentive to justify a
large investment on the Web because of Canada's punitive taxation structure.
"Why would well-managed, intelligently led retailers not be on selling on the Internet ?" he asks. "The answer is that, at this stage, the risk-reward isn't right in Canada. There isn't an
entrepreneurial drive to get people to shop on-line because people can't make as much money as in the U.S."
To date, Mountain Equipment Co-op's on-line presence has been limited to providing information about its outdoor products and activities.
Even though the company has an extensive catalogue operation that takes orders by telephone, fax and mail, it has not taken the next logical step -- selling on-line.
Despite Mr. Gibson's wariness, many consumers are looking to shop on-line. The Retail Council-IBM study found that about half of the 2,000 respondents say they would shop at
Canadian sites if the selection of merchandise was the same.
Seattle-based Amazon.com Inc., for example, was doing more than $20-million (U.S.) a year of business with Canadians before Chapters and rival Indigo Books & Music Inc. moved
into the market. Some of other U.S. companies that have done well with Canadian on-line shoppers are catalogue retailers J. Crew Group Inc. and Lands' End Inc.
Still, Canadian retailers are becoming more aggressive.
Toronto-based Chapters is, perhaps, the leading example of a Canadian retailer using U.S.-style tactics to grab market share.
Chapters has achieved significant presence in recent months by using outdoor billboards, advertisements in newspapers and magazines and radio spots to let consumers know it's
open for on-line business -- prompting Indigo to keep abreast with an extensive marketing campaign of its own.
Sites can't sow seeds alone

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

150/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

While the on-line book and music categories in Canada are as well developed as the United States, retailers in other categories still battle to attract business.
The J. C. Williams-BizRate.com study found that the on-line garden supply business, for example, is twice as popular in the United States -- even though four out of 10 Canadians are
involved in this country's $3.4-billion sector.
J. C. Williams' Mr. West says such markets will only mature when bricks-and-mortar vendors join on-line startups on the Web.
Among the upstart garden supplies retailers trying to attract customers is Vancouver-based eSeeds.com Inc., which has been doing business since 1997.
Mala Gunadasa-Rohling, president and chief executive officer with eSeeds.com, says the electronic-commerce market has not grown as fast because consumers here are slower to
adopt new ways of doing business.
This is especially prevalent in the gardening industry, she says.
"Gardening, itself, is a very traditional market and slow to change for the most part," she says. "People are quite conservative, so winning them over takes time."
Ms. Gunadasa-Rohling says a patient approach is essential because once people become comfortable with shopping on the Internet for plants and seeds, they are very loyal and
spend a lot of money. A key part of the process, she says, is educating people about the security and convenience of the Internet . The Net requires rethinking
For a lot of retailers, doing business on the Internet means they will have to adopt completely new marketing strategies.
The use of newspapers and magazines, for example, to solicit business are marketing vehicles that Canadian on-line retailers should consider, if the U.S. experience is any guide.
According to the study, 14.1 per cent of U.S. shoppers cited print media as the way they learned about an on-line retailer, compared to 6.2 per cent in Canada.
Canadian retailers also need to do a better job of getting more women to spend money on the Web.
Paul Romanchuk, chairman and chief executive officer with Northstarmall.ca Inc. in Richmond Hill, Ont., says many retailers have completely missed the on-line boat by focusing too
much on a single demographic group: tech-savvy males between 20 and 45 years old.
While that explains why computer software and hardware sales rank among the popular in Canada and the United States, Mr. Romanchuk says the male-centric marketing programs
ignore where the real on-line dollars can be found: women and teenagers.
"The electronic-commerce experience to date in Canada has been pitiful," he says, adding that too many Web sites have been developed by people with technical, rather than
marketing, skills.
Norstarmall.ca aims to become a major destination for on-line shoppers in Canada by creating a three-dimensional virtual mall.
Emulating a real-world shopping centre, Mr. Romanchuk says Norstarmall.ca will cater to women by offering a large portfolio of well-known fashion retailers.
"The site will be addressed to the female demographic because that's where the dollars are," he says. "Very few people have unlocked those dollars and, from our perspective, it is
literally a gold mine if you make purchases easier and bring the right retailers to the Web."
Norstarmall.ca, he says, is willing to match its cyberbravado with a $3-million to $6-million targeted marketing campaign that will make it difficult for consumers to ignore.
The company is not alone in pursuing the one-stop shopping concept.
Yahoo Canada, a unit of Santa Clara, Calif.-based Yahoo Inc., recently unveiled Yahoo Canada Shopping, where consumers can purchase merchandise and services from 200
Canadian retailers.
AltaVista Canada, a venture between BCT.Telus Communications Inc. of Burnaby, B.C. and CMGI Inc. of Andover, Mass., has launched the AltaVista Canada Shopping Guide with 200
Canadian retailers.
Another tactic that Canadian retailers must exploit is targeting underserved market niches. According to the study, these areas include pet supplies, food, automobiles and toys.
Hudson's Bay Co., which was granted a royal charter by King Charles II in 1670 when Canada -- like the Internet today -- was still being explored, is pursuing specific on-line
categories such as toys, baby supplies and gift registries through its Bay and Zellers units.
Michael Leblanc, senior manager of interactive retailing with the Toronto-based company, says Hudson's Bay moved into these markets last year and had good success during
Christmas sales season.
Hudson's Bay is still trying to figure out how to build its Web-based businesses.
One of its most promising ventures came to an abrupt end earlier this year when Hudson's Bay decided to close Outfitters, its upscale outdoor goods store. Analysts says the Outfitters
concept could have had strong Web prospects because it played in a niche category and targeted upscale consumers.
Mr. Leblanc says getting people to visit the company's virtual stores is a challenge but Hudson's Bay has some unique tools -- such as the nine million Zellers flyers that it sends to
Canadian households each week.
Christmas presence
So what does the next year -- an eternity in the Internet -- hold for the Canadian electronic-commerce market?
The first major test will be Christmas.
Christmas, 1998, was the first time that on-line shopping moved into the mainstream in the United States. Canadian retailers are hoping that consumers up here discover that the Web
is a great way to avoid claustrophobic malls, long lineups and frenzied forays for last-minute gifts.
The Boston Consulting Group's Mr. Pecaut says there are encouraging on-line developments in Canada but, sadly, it is not an across-the-board phenomenon.
"Canadian retailers fall into two camps," he says. "One group is in gear and we'll see much more exciting and well-developed sites. The other group's frozen in the headlights. They see
the Internet as costly and don't know what to do."
Site seeing
www .bizrate.com/merchant--info/surveyweb.xpml [http://www.bizrate.com/merchant--info/surveyweb.xpml] www .jcwg.com [http://www.jcwg.com/]
SHAKERS AND QUAKERS
While upstart firms become movers and shakers on the Internet , some of Canada's biggest retailers remain quaking on the sidelines
SHAKERS

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

151/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Chapters Online Inc., books, videos, music Indigo Online Inc., books
Uniglobe.com Inc., travel agency Bid.Com International Inc., auction house CDNow Inc., music
QUAKERS
Mountain Equipment Co-op, outdoor equipment Canadian Tire Corp., hardware, auto parts Forzani Group Ltd., sporting goods Dylex Corp., clothing Mark's Work Wearhouse Ltd.,
clothing
THE MOUSE AND THE ELEPHANT
Gender breakdown of people who buy on-line
Canada
United States
Male
78.3%
64.9%
Female
21.7%
35.1%
AGE OF ON-LINE SHOPPERS
Canada
United States
Under 12
0.0%
0.0%
12-17
1.1%
1.0%
18-24
12.3%
8.9%
25-34
24.8%
25.3%
35-49
35.6%
38.4%
50-54
13.7%
13.1%
55-64
9.2%
9.8%
65+
3.2%
3.4%
How they find Web sites
Canada
United States
Print
6.2%
14.1%
TV
3.2%
2.3%
Web
61.4%
54.1%
Radio
1.2%
1.2%
Alternative*
27.0%
28.2%
-*Alternative includes: Friend's recommendation/Word of mouth: Previous
visits to this merchant's Web site; Prior off-line experience with this
merchant; Don't remember, Email; Typed in Web address; and Other.

RETAIL CATALOGUE
Most popular categories for on-line purchases CANADA
1. Computer software
15.7%
2. Music
12.7
3. Books
11.4
4. Computer hardware
8.9
5. On-line banking
8.0
6. Video
4.4
7. Tickets
3.7
7. Gifts
3.7
8. Apparel, acces. & shoes
3.5
9. Travel
3.3
10. Consumer electronics
3.1
UNITED STATES
1. Books
11.0%
2. Computer software
10.9
3. Music
8.7
4. Computer hardware
7.7
5. Gifts
6.1
6. Apparel, acces. & shoes
5.3
7. Video
4.4
8. Travel
4.3
9. On-line banking
4.2
9. Flowers
4.2
10. Toys, games & hobbies
3.8
Source: J.C. Williams Group, BizRate.com
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv9g01c5x

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

152/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Book Review

Why the people fear and loathe The Media POWER & BETRAYAL IN THE CANADIAN MEDIA
DOUG SAUNDERS
1391 words
3 July 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D12
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

By David Taras Broadview Press, 247 pages, $21.95
SPIN WARS
By Bill Fox Key Porter, 288 pages, $24.95
This may be remembered as the century in which correspondents, those neighbours who sent letters from courtrooms and capitals to the local broadsheet, were transformed into The
Media, a monolithic institution accorded all the high expectations and deep loathings we would expect from a branch of government.
What happened? It is not that the craft of reporting has changed . Just look at the stories on the antique Globe and Mail front page reprinted on D8 of this section, and experience the
shock of familiarity. Reporters don't behave much differently than they did a century ago, except that they are now better paid and have fancier tools. How, then, do we explain their
transformation from fellow citizens into distrusted institution?
It might owe something to the emergence of media studies, one of those academic disciplines that sprouted in the hollow spaces between philosophy and history. Marshall McLuhan
and his lesser disciples have given us an interesting new vocabulary, but they have also placed a heavy burden on the modest craft of reporting. It is now treated like a profession, with
all the elitism, pomp and hazard that entails, rather than as a reflex of citizenship. When the media became The Media, they stopped being our friends.
This antipathy lies at the heart of two new books about Canada's media scene. On the surface, they have much in common: They both presuppose that relations between reporters and
Canada's public and government have become less virtuous, they both draw heavily on U.S. media-studies scholars such as Neil Postman and Howard Kurtz, and they both conclude
that the media have fallen out of the control of ordinary people. In the end, though, these are very different books with opposing agendas.
University of Calgary professor David Taras has written Power & Betrayal in the Canadian Media as an elegy on the loss of the "central public squares" he feels the media once were.
His premise is deliciously counterintuitive: Despite the explosion of new forms of media, Taras believes the diversity of voices available to Canadians has actually decreased. "Despite
surface appearances," he writes, "our media worlds are growing smaller rather than larger. They are becoming less open and less diverse even as they seem to be expanding, even
exploding, in so many different directions." In other words, is it possible that we are actually undergoing an information implosion?
In asking this question, Taras sticks to a handful of familiar themes: the emergence of omnipotent media mega-corporations such as Time Warner, the decline of the CBC's budget and
influence over the past 10 years, the "Hollywoodization" of private-sector TV, the small handful of people who own Canada's newspapers and their generally right-wing cast.
His freshest and most valuable material is to be found in his chapters on the CBC. In case you thought the Chretien government's antipathy toward the public broadcaster is anything
new, Taras provides a detailed account of instances of government interference going back to the Diefenbaker years. And his chapter on the sometimes clumsy attempts by CBC-TV
news to cover national-unity crises over the past 20 years is a good study of the dilemmas faced by a public broadcaster in a polyglot nation.
But this section is diminished by Taras's own overweening patriotism. Over several pages, he provides convincing evidence (including studies he has commissioned) to show that the
CBC, in both its English and French services, had a distinct pro-federalist bias in its coverage of the 1995 referendum campaign. Yet instead of lamenting this as a further example of
the broadcaster's overly intimate relationship with the state, he complains that the CBC pulled its punches by failing to argue harder against separatist rhetoric; he feels the CBC "had
abandoned the critical guardianship and trusteeship roles so fundamental to journalism and democracy."
Here he has lost his footing. That "guardianship and trusteeship" surely must refer to the impartiality of fact gathering and the independence of storytelling, not to nationalist mythology
and official propaganda. If he believes, as he states repeatedly, that the CBC should be a "village square," then he cannot expect it to sit on the balcony with the generals.
This is a book about the media of today, and Taras does not often extend his historical excavations before the postwar era. Had he done so, there is reason to believe his book's
underpinnings would collapse. Perhaps there was a time when crime and sensation didn't dominate the front pages, when big companies didn't control most newspapers , when the
CBC was unfettered and newspapers weren't largely conservative. But this golden age is never located by Taras, which makes it hard to credit his claim that "the Canadian media
system is in the midst of a profound crisis." It might be that his beloved village square has always smelled like a farmers' market.
If this vision is gloomy, Bill Fox offers one that is downright ebullient; he even describes himself with the unfortunate neologism "neo-polyannaist." Fox is certainly no fan of the current
Canadian media, but he is confident that the Internet will soon sweep the whole ugly thing away: "The passive world, the hallmark of the television era, will give way to a new
interactive public discourse that will challenge the 'top-down' news approach of the past thirty years."
This is not what we expected from Bill Fox, especially in a book titled Spin Wars. Many Canadians will remember Fox as Brian Mulroney's chief spokesman and spin doctor from 1984
to 1987, and you would expect this book to be full of tales of clever media manipulation and public-relations skullduggery. Mulroney was Canada's first spin-generated prime minister, a
man dearly devoted to the media, and this book ought to be filled with juicy stuff. How, for instance, did Fox help Mulroney shift from campaigning on national child care to governing on
a thinner social safety net, all while maintaining a mutual love affair with the media throughout his first term?
We learn little of this, since Fox has moved on to loftier things. While working as a prominent Ottawa consultant, he was awarded a one-year fellowship at the New York-based Media
Studies Center run by the Freedom Forum journalism foundation, of which Mulroney is a board member.
It often reads as if Fox is emptying his classroom notebooks, using snatches of media-studies jargon, wise and trite, to support rambling, sometimes bitter observations on the
Canadian media: "Television's dominant news frame established patronage as a 'problem' and positioned Turner and Mulroney as individuals with the power to either alleviate or
forestall alleviation of the problem," he writes in a typical passage.
At the core of this book are long chapters examining the media's treatment of the Pearson Airport privatization and Mulroney-Airbus scandals. Surprisingly, Fox approaches these
events as an academic outsider, relying on news clippings and interviews with journalists and politicians (including several long interviews with Mulroney). There is often a discord
between Fox's remote voice and his personal connections to the people and events involved. As a detailed but partisan account, this covers ground familiar to readers of William
Kaplan's book Presumed Guilty, but where Kaplan relies on Mulroney's documents, Fox relies far more on the former prime minister's own words, including long descriptions of his
delight in finally defeating his media foes.
The rest of the book is tainted by these chapters. Fox looks forward to the day when such "spin wars" (and, presumably, his own former occupation) will be rendered obsolete by the
democratizing forces of the Internet . The Media will once again become a group of corresponding neighbours, he predicts, and he believes that leaders such as Mulroney will get a

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

153/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

better ride as a result. His optimism is impressive, but one wonders if his tone would have been different had he written this book 15 years ago, when The Media was his oyster. Doug
Saunders is an arts reporter with The Globe and Mail.
Document glob000020010827dv7300yhc

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

154/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

FAST FORWARD

Dispelling the myth of online anonymity
Net.column K.K. Campbell
991 words
22 July 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Companies will be forced to act on false online rumours
Companies
Online ranters better be prepared to defend what they publish
Internet Week recently had an article - "Self-styled critics cause headaches for site managers" - about how trying it can be to have people online writing unfavourable things about
products.
Get used to it. As Regis McKenna notes in his book Real Time (Harvard Business School Press), we're entering the age of the "never satisfied customer."
The 20th century, with its one-way mass media, was supplier-driven.
The 21st century, with its two-way mass media, will be customer-driven. The Internet is the prototype of that two-way medium.
Dissatisfied customers can be heard immediately, en masse, and if you want to ignore what they're saying, they're one click away from your competition. Business can't figure out what
to do about it. Where it once required great effort to organize disgruntled consumers, it's now as easy as posting to relevant public forums.
But Net users must realize posting to these forums is "publishing" - including all the legal implications. Your words can reach around the world. With that power comes responsibility:
legal liability.
Some users don't want that and have bought into the Myth of Anonymity. They use what they think are "anonymous" accounts. When you go there, you're entering a whole new
psychological realm. You better have great self-discipline.
There's something about text-driven chat forums that cause flame wars to begin. But when people think they're "hidden," it gets much worse.
I've been observing "anonymous" people in controversial dialogues since I came online in 1989. Two things tend to happen:
The anonymous person acts progressively more foolish - and that can accelerate at astonishing speeds.
When a critical mass of foolish behaviour is reached, people begin investigating who it is.
When it was just bunches of individuals online , the repercussions were small - you might have your connectivity yanked by a university administrator.
This is a new world. Billion-dollar companies with billion-dollar reputations will make the stakes much higher.
Right now, most companies that think they are " online " really aren't. They have happy little Web sites and plan for e-commerce functions. But their sites sit like forts on the fringe of the
population.
They don't understand the way online communities work (they're mobile and ever-shifting). They don't understand the experience of discussion areas (it's very "hot," to borrow a
McLuhan term). They don't realize how reputation can be transformed through the wildfire spread of word-of-mouth campaigns. (If one person sent a rumour to 10 people via e-mail,
and those 10 then each sent it to another 10, half the world would have heard the rumour in a week.)
This will change . While business wants to dismiss forums as "kook nests," Wall Street is forcing them to see the power. Online rumours can cause market capitalization to plummet
$100 million over a weekend. Some people try to manufacture rumours that will benefit their portfolios.
The first big U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission sweep came last October when 44 individuals and companies were charged with stock price manipulation through Web sites
and chat areas - more than double all such charges laid since 1995.
Companies will be forced to take notice of anything said online about them because it shows up in market analyst reports.
Last fall, an Alabama company called Health South Corp. heard from analysts about a Yahoo! forum dedicated to it. CEO Richard Scrushy hadn't heard of the forum. There are
thousands on Yahoo! This one was opened by a user in 1997 to discuss the stock as an investment.
Online rumours can cause market capitalization to plummet $100 million over a weekend
When the stock price dropped last year, it got ugly.
Increasingly nasty postings alleged poor health care practices, financial fraud, and executive "wife swapping."
Someone even posted he'd had an affair with the CEO's wife. And it was all done "anonymously."
"Here I am, the CEO of a multibillion-dollar company, and I'm having to answer about what some weirdo has said on a message board," Scrushy was recently quoted in the Wall Street
Journal.
So he didn't answer. He hired detectives - both the online and the offline kind.
On Oct. 16, 1998, Health South filed a "John Doe" suit - meaning, whomever he was, when found he'd answer.
The filing also meant it could subpoena Yahoo! user records.
Eleven days later, a new anonymous post called for the CEO to resign. They'd been waiting.
The online investigators had traced this poster back to a computer in the Pennsylvania State University Conference Centre Hotel.
The offline sleuths found that a Penn State employee named Peter Krum once worked for Health South and had a loading-dock office with a computer in it.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

155/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Campus security arrived. Krum admitted he'd made the post, and many others, including ones about sexual activity. He signed an apology stating it was all made up. He was fired from
his managerial job at the university.
(The case is similar to the Ontario suit by Hamilton-based Philip against anonymous posters to a Yahoo! forum. The case is still before the courts, but charges have been dropped
against most of the defendants.)
This is light years from the days of 1993. Private investigators are skilled. You leave more traces of yourself online than ever. Anonymous posting is important. Whistleblowers are a
David-and-Goliath tradition in our society.
But if you aren't sure you can cover yourself, try using the news media .
Online ranters, meanwhile, better be prepared to defend what they publish.
K.K. Campbell (kkc@kkc.net) is a freelance journalist and Internet business consultant.
Document tor0000020010830dv7m00mx7

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

156/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The Arts

CBC struggles at the crossroads The public broadcaster is adrift in the face of dwindling resources, increasing demands and
labour unrest
DOUG SAUNDERS
1593 words
13 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

It has been four weeks since Gloria Macarenko's face disappeared from the Vancouver airwaves, but it doesn't look as though anyone has called for a search party.
"Thank you for watching us. Good night." Those were her final words as a local CBC news anchor on Feb. 16, before a technicians' strike blew her Vancouver show, along with most
of CBC Television's local newscasts, off the air. Recently, Macarenko has returned for brief evening appearances, but her absence sparked little alarm. And no wonder: In Vancouver,
as in most Canadian cities, the CBC's local news comes a very distant second to that of its private competitors. On that final night, its viewers numbered in the tens of thousands.
Too bad, because if viewers studied the CBC's local news shows, they would learn a lot about its current paradox, the circumstances that have led to the crippling technicians' strike, a
protracted set of hearings into the public broadcaster's future , and an internal mood that swings wildly between fervent support and deep frustration. They might see why, last week,
the network's 3,000 journalists (outside Quebec) gave their union an overwhelming mandate to join technicians on the picket lines, which could happen as soon as next Thursday.
Three years ago, a confidential 16-page memo from senior CBC management sent waves of alarm -- and excitement -- through newsrooms across the country. Up to that point, the
local shows had been hard to distinguish from CTV's light-and-bright newscasts, which garner the highest ratings in most Canadian provinces (Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island
being the only notable exceptions). The memo implied that this had been a mistake.
The CBC shows "must become more distinctive in ways that better reflect their role in public broadcasting," the memo began. They should adopt "a deeper emphasis on the treatment
and analysis of news and issues important to the community . . . original, not just reactive." People would be retrained, given new tasks, asked to forget their old assumptions.
And then came the kicker: "At the same time, the programs must reduce their costs significantly."
For Sue Rideout, producer of the Vancouver show, this was a strange mix of delightful opportunity and impossible challenge. "If you're trying to transform yourself into an excellent
product and at the same time cut 40 per cent out of the budget, it puts stress everywhere," she said in an interview. "I actually find it kind of amazing that we're able to turn out the kind
of product we are."
Get better. Spend less. Do more things. Be more distinctive. Maintain existing operations. Use fewer people. These contradictory commands have been shouted from the deck of the
CBC over and over in recent years, aimed at every division of the company, as senior managers were ordered by Ottawa to cut a third of the corporation's staff and budget while
maintaining all its operations.
"In many ways, it was a cultural change for a lot of our people," said Bob Culbert, head of news for English television. He was responsible for cutting all the news shows, and
"making them reflect CBC values," as he put it. It has been a tough three years. "There's huge risk involved, and we knew that, because it's much easier to keep doing the same thing."
His decisions may have been difficult, but they were easier than some of the alternatives. In the mid-1990s, the CBC's Ottawa executives had considered another option: focus money
and resources on the CBC's core operation, its national service, and shut down obsolete or underperforming divisions, such as local and regional news in big cities.
The regions would actually receive better news coverage, the theory went, since the money would be spent on journalists in bureaus, not on executives and transmitters. That
argument did not prevail, and cuts were ordered across the board. The local shows would stay -- but they would be made better, and cheaper.
Now that the cuts seem to be finished and funding has stabilized, some entirely unexpected things have happened to the broadcaster.
For one thing, it has improved.
Ten years of mass layoffs and nail biting seem to have provoked a creative revolution at the CBC. Its senior executives finally eliminated deep and stifling layers of bureaucracy in its
Ottawa headquarters. The TV schedule, for the first time in its history, was stripped of U.S. imports. The network has had a string of critical successes with its Canadian shows, and has
continued to dominate awards for drama and journalism . Its prime-time ratings share actually increased slightly last year, at a time when other networks were losing millions of
viewers to cable.
And local news shows like Vancouver's did improve. To watch tapes of the CBC's Vancouver and Winnipeg supper newscasts from 1996 and then from early 1999 is to see a marked
contrast. Before, there were far too many hyped headlines, pointless feel-good stories, and stretches of chitchat between hosts. Now, the shows are sober, smart, classy, modelled after
The National, with analysis and interview segments ending the newscast. And in many cities, including Vancouver, the ratings have risen, though they still lag behind the private
stations.
But something else seems to have happened to the CBC in the wake of the cuts: It has become strained, spread too thin. The changes , after all, were made within a corporation
whose structure and scope has changed little in 40 years.
The CBC still operates a huge web of old-style TV and radio transmitters; unlike Britain's BBC, which is housed largely in London, the CBC operates dozens of distinct and often
competing local, regional and national operations. As Canadians switched to cable-TV in the 1980s, CBC launched two cable services, Newsworld and RDI -- but they were simply
added to the existing web of operations.
The cost of this 1950s-style structure is enormous. As well as its Toronto and Montreal production centres, the CBC owns 22 full-scale TV stations across Canada, each of them with its
own evening news show, production studio and inner bureaucracy. There are 614 transmission towers that repeat their signals. (Another 24 privately owned stations and 61 private
transmitters carry CBC-TV signals.) Those stations are expensive, and generate little return: In 1998, the CBC made only $26-million from all local advertising, English and French,
according to figures filed with the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission.
Most tellingly, the CBC's real-estate holdings alone are worth almost a billion dollars. Even as broadcast executives say their core business is "software" and "content creation," the
CBC spends huge amounts of money on hardware, overhead and administration.
Some worry it will get worse before it gets better. This year, outgoing CBC president Perrin Beatty is seeking to expand into a range of new services. These include a number of new
specialty cable channels, new Internet ventures, the Land and Sea service (which would provide satellite-and-cable programming across diverse regions), and the Radio Three
network -- a full-fledged service aimed at young listeners.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

157/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

In Beatty's view, and that of many CBC executives, these expansions will justify themselves in time by generating new audiences and sources of revenue. As he said in an interview:
"You cannot simply be sitting on a couple of channels that get nibbled apart and fragmented by an explosion of other alternatives, and still be able to do your job of reaching Canadian
audiences."
But this has not stopped people at all levels of the CBC from worrying that another round of simultaneous cutting and building could do real damage.
"We're really scared that they're going to dilute things even further," said a producer with one of the CBC's more popular national radio shows. "We're stretched really thin, and now
they're talking about using the same people and the same money to run a third network."
According to its licence application, Radio Three would be built using a $5.9-million parliamentary appropriation. Its operating costs would be around $500,000 a year, which will come
out of existing radio budgets, and it will be staffed with people who currently work in the Radio One and Radio Two networks. These people almost all say they are overworked now.
And some new austerity measures have already appeared: Last month, news head Culbert announced plans to shut down three of the CBC's foreign bureaus, and to spend less on
international coverage. Independent TV producers report that the CBC is spending less than ever on fees for new programs. And, as recent headlines have shown, thousands of
employees believe they are bearing an undue load without fair compensation.
When the labour disputes are resolved and the local news anchors return to the screen, the debate will begin in earnest. On May 25, three weeks of hearings into the CBC will begin
in Hull. Ostensibly to consider the broadcaster's licence-renewal applications, the session is certain to turn into a debate about the CBC's future .
At its root will be the question that has caused so much pain in recent years, in Ottawa and in stations scattered across the country. Perhaps, this time around, it will be answered:
Should the CBC be bigger, or should it be better?
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv3d00djx

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

158/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

TECHNOLOGY AT WORK
Report on Business Special Report

Call Internet's next wave Gen XML New language makes Web faster, smarter.
KEVIN MARRON
1094 words
17 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

A new universal language that cuts through the babel of the world's computer systems is speeding the growth of E-commerce by making the World Wide Web faster and smarter.
And the Canadian who helped invent it says he is amazed by how quickly the technology world has taken up the new communications standard, called Extensible Markup Language, or
XML.
"Those of us who helped invent XML are absolutely flabbergasted, overjoyed, struck incredulous at the rapidity and spread of the adoption," says Vancouver-based software developer
Tim Bray. "It's everywhere out there, and the growth rate doesn't appear to be slowing down."
Mr. Bray is one of three people who wrote the specifications for the new language, with input from other members of a working group established in 1996 by the World Wide Web
Consortium, an international body that sets the standards for the Internet .
XML is being heralded as the technology that will power the next generation of the Internet but its basic concept is blazingly simple, according to Mr. Bray. It provides Internet users
with a straightforward and efficient way of embedding codes in the messages they send, so as to identify what each piece of information is or what it is for.
These codes, known as tags, could be used to distinguish a phone number from a product number or the title of a book from the name of a song -- distinctions that may be obvious to
someone reading a document but not to computer software that sees all of the information as streams of ones and zeros.
HTML (hypertext markup language), the current common language of the Internet , has limited value because it was designed only as a tool for publishing and formatting documents
on the Web, not for using them in interactive applications such as E-commerce.
Whereas HTML describes how information should look when displayed on a screen, XML describes what it is. It therefore makes it possible to include codes that can be used to
process and analyze information.
"Instead of being the world's largest bulletin board for brochures, the Web becomes a platform for business," says Roberto Drassinower, president and chief executive officer of
SoftQuad Software Inc., a Toronto-based developer of Web authoring tools and a co-founder of the international working group that created the XML specifications.
Documents such as invoices or purchase orders can now be exchanged over the Internet in a format that makes it possible for computer programs to identify relevant pieces of
information, such as prices and inventory numbers, then transfer this data into accounting software or other applications.
"It's a complete change in the paradigm of how we do business," says Les McNeill, executive vice-president of global marketing and business development for Open Text Corp. of
Waterloo, Ont., which develops Web-based software that helps organizations collaborate and manage information.
The XML standards that were first published in February of last year have since been adopted by major technology vendors including Microsoft Corp., International Business Machines
Corp. and Oracle Corp. And many large companies are getting together to agree upon how to adapt the language for E-commerce.
The language is described as "extensible" because it makes it possible to add an almost limitless number of labels or tags, but these labels can be useful only if users agree about what
they represent.
"There's been a dramatic surge of interest and tremendous enthusiasm in terms of people coming together to establish industry standards around XML, from financial services to
chemical production to news publishing," Mr. Drassinower says.
"XML is the unifying technology that allows multiple companies in an E-commerce environment to work seamlessly together, even though their application processes and data models
are entirely different," says Mr. McNeill, whose company is incorporating the new language in the next release of its Web-based collaboration platform, LiveLink.
In an electronic phone bill, for example, XML tags can be used to identify the date of a phone call, the time and the number called, as well as how all this should appear when it is
printed on a document.
As long as the company sending the bill and the company receiving it have agreed about what the tags mean, the information can flow from one internal computer system to the other.
"A receiver who may not be human can analyze these documents," says Marian Lewandowski, vice-president of Richmond Hill, Ont.-based Xenos-Group Inc., a software company
involved in the electronic bill presentment field.
And it doesn't matter what kind of hardware or software each company is using internally. XML lets the computers talk to one another and collaborate in a way that was possible before
only with the help of very expensive customized systems for electronic-data exchange.
With HTML, on-line searches can be smarter, as search engines are able to examine tags, plus text, thus excluding irrelevant results and making it possible to look for things such as
the lowest price or the product with the most recent date.
Sending information in XML makes it much easier for other computers to process, and Mr. Bray maintains that this will have an enormous impact on speeding up traffic and relieving
congestion on the Internet .
He says current practices lead to congestion. If you are booking a flight with an on-line travel agent, for example, you probably will begin by viewing a page with all the flights to your
destination on a given day, and you may then ask for a list of the cheapest flights or ones that arrive early in the morning.
The travel agent's computer system will have to analyze the data and send you another page of information. You may then have more questions, so more information will have to be
sent back and forth.
With XML, the travel agent can send you the schedules with prices, times and other details all identified with tags so you can do all the sorting and analysis you need on your laptop
without bothering the travel agent's computer again.
"Not only do you get better performance, but the server and the Net are doing less work, so everything runs better," Mr. Bray says. "I maintain that this kind of processing is the No. 1
thing that needs to be done to make the Internet faster and better."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

159/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Document glob000020010827dvch01t9f

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

160/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

STOCK IN THE NEWS ANALYSIS
Report on Business: Money & Markets

DoubleClick clicks with analysts Shares of Internet advertising shop have provided one-year return of 475 per cent
Carolyn Leitch
1061 words
26 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B13
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Internet advertising shop DoubleClick Inc. offers a rare combination in Web stocks: The shares have shot into the stratosphere while the company has earned the respect of Wall
Street analysts.
New York-based DoubleClick sells banner advertising space on a network of World Wide Web sites and licences technology that helps companies manage ads on their sites.
This week, the stock got a boost after DoubleClick announced two large deals to develop advertising for high-speed Internet service providers. On Tuesday, the company said it will
deploy and monitor ads for Road Runner, the biggest U.S. high-speed, on-line service that is part-owned by Microsoft Corp. and Time Warner Inc. On Monday, DoubleClick inked a
similar deal with Comcast Corp.
That news sent the shares to a record $200 (U.S.) on the Nasdaq Stock Market. The shares, which were first sold to the public at $17 each in February, 1998, have provided a oneyear total return of 475 per cent. The stock closed at $184.75 yesterday.
The rise has been so steep that DoubleClick plans to split its stock two-for-one on April 2, which could fuel another runup.
Last week, analyst Scott Reamer of SG Cowen & Co. in New York upgraded DoubleClick to "strong buy" from "buy" and raised his target price to $200.
He believes the company will be very hard to unseat as it expands in the hyper-growth market of cyberspace advertising.
Just as people used to say that no manager ever got fired for buying IBM computers in the 1980s or Microsoft software in the 1990s, DoubleClick has reached a point of widespread
acceptance and critical mass, Mr. Reamer said.
"In the advertising world, DoubleClick has become the 'safe' buy, with a product recognition and service reputation that is second to none."
The company matches Web sites with the advertisers that want to reach them. It helps flower growers who want to entice gardeners with the lush beauty of their Bellflower Carpathian
'Blue Clips,' for example, to place their ad spots at garden.com,not autoweb.com.
This ability to reach a very specific audience gives Internet advertising a power that television and print cannot match.
" Internet advertising will be all about targeting in '99: DoubleClick targets in spades," Mr. Reamer said.
The company also sells so-called boomerang technology, which lets advertisers track the on-line habits of computer users for weeks after their visit to a particular Web site and greet
them with the same advertising message when they visit any one of the 6,400 sites on the DoubleClick network.
Mr. Reamer estimates that DoubleClick's loss will narrow to 75 cents a share in 1999 from $1.13 in 1998. His forecast shows the company posting a profit of 10 cents in 2000.
Revenue that came in at $80-million in 1998 will likely hit $148-million this year, Mr. Reamer estimates.
He added that the stock has had an enormous run, but he would view any weakness as a nice buying opportunity ahead of what should be a solid quarter.
BancBoston Robertson Stephens analyst Keith Benjamin of San Francisco admits that he was late on the stock when he recently raised his rating to "buy" from "market perform."
Mr. Benjamin is encouraged by news that fourth-quarter revenue almost tripled and an important client, Compaq Computer Corp.'s AltaVista search engine, agreed to a three-year
contract.
AltaVista is DoubleClick's biggest account. The relationship accounted for 44 per cent of DoubleClick's revenue last quarter.
Mr. Benjamin said the signing of AltaVista to a binding, long-term contract has removed a significant overhang from DoubleClick's stock.
He is also impressed by the company's pace of growth: The DoubleClick network swelled to 340 Web publishers with 1,320 unique sites in the fourth quarter from 270 publishers with
930 unique sites in the third quarter.
New York-based analyst David Rivas of Keane Securities calls DoubleClick a "long-term buy," but he is not calling for a straight trajectory upward.
"[The stock] may have some volatility in the next few months."
Mr. Rivas admits that placing a value on an Internet stock is something of a black art.
The analyst looks at the number of customers DoubleClick has and how many people are visiting their sites. He receives the data from an outside market research firm instead of
relying on DoubleClick's numbers.
"To be honest, none of the valuations for Internet stocks are definite arguments yet."
One U.S.-based market research firm is estimating on-line advertising will be worth $5.5-billion globally this year and $7.1-billion by 2002.
Mr. Rivas says he is optimistic about DoubleClick's prospects because its network is increasing significantly, the company is expanding globally and its software is becoming more
efficient.
He is also impressed by management: DoubleClick's founder and chief executive officer is a high-tech entrepreneur from Atlanta named Kevin O'Connor. The team is very aggressive
at getting partnerships, Mr. Riva said.
The company has competitors, such as 24/7 Media Inc. and NetGravity Inc., but they are not as advanced, he added.
"Management is very good. They have been the leaders since the beginning. On the Internet , if you're a leader, you're going to have a significant advantage."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

161/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Bottom Line
Of nine analysts who follow DoubleClick, every one of them rates the stock a "buy." The company is expanding fast, jumping ahead of rivals and becoming established as the industry
standard. But if you're going to invest in Internet stocks, take your heart pills.
DOUBLECLICK INC.: VITAL STATISTICS
Head office: New York, NY Telephone: 212-683-0001 Nasdaq symbol: CDLK, $(U.S.) Business: Provides internet advertising solutions for advertisers and web publishers. Provides
fully-outsourced ad sales, delivery and related services to web site publishers. SHARE VALUES Trailing 120-month earnings per share...-$1.13
52-week high
52-week low
Last close
Change from previous
1-year total return
12-month average annual return

$184.75
$16.06
$184.75
+$4.87
475.10%
182.21%

Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv3q00fnv

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

162/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS ON THE WEB
Report on Business Special Report

Learning from experience Four firms that have taken the plunge offer insights on how to succeed at business on the Web.
JOANNE SOMMERS
1538 words
24 September 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
R7
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

As more companies try their hand at doing business on the Web, what does it take to succeed?
Four companies that have taken the plunge offer up lessons from their experience.
Stockgroup.com
New Westminster, B.C. www .stockgroup.com [http://www.stockgroup.com/] Projected 1999 revenue:
$2.7-million Stockgroup.com provides investors with news and information about small- and micro-cap stocks. It was launched by chief executive officer Marcus New as a homebased business five years ago.
Why is your business successful?
We provide unique and proprietary content that is difficult to obtain elsewhere. Information sources on small- and micro-cap markets have traditionally been fragmented, and the sector
is underreported in other media. There was no single source of information on this market before Stockgroup.com.
How do you attract business to your site?
Initially, we spent about 10 hours a week asking related sites for links to Stockgroup.com. That strategy wouldn't work in today's market, which is much more competitive. Early on, our
site won recognition, which helped to boost exposure and credibility. Lycos, for example, identified Stockgroup.com as the Internet 's top investment site for 17 months.
Have you met your financial expectations ?
Stockgroup.com was built entirely on internally generated cash flow. The company brought in its first outside partners and went public last March. We have met and in many ways
exceeded our financial projections every year we've been in business. We projected 1999 revenues of $2.7-million and reached $1.7-million in the first six months of the year. And $1.5million of that came in the last quarter alone.
What was your biggest mistake in creating an on-line business?
Rather than focusing exclusively on the Web business, we made a major investment in a company that did trade shows for customers like ours. We devoted considerable time and
money to that effort and it was a complete waste.
If we were starting again, we would expand into the Toronto and U.S. financial markets much sooner. We didn't get ourselves in front of the big Canadian and American financial players
as quickly as we should have and, as a result, didn't maximize our revenue potential fast enough.
What is your advice to E-commerce newcomers?
It's quite expensive to enter the E-commerce field today. Make sure you have a clear business plan and a fair amount of money behind you. You'll need it to remain flexible, expand
your business and make changes as necessary.
Uniquely Canada
Abbotsford, B.C. www .uniquelycanada.com [http://www.uniquelycanada.com/] Projected 1999 revenue:
$60,000 to $70,000
Specializing in sales of hand-made crafts and objets d'art by Canadian artists, Uniquely Canada launched its first Web site in September, 1996; it closed 15 months later because it was
losing money. "We were ahead of our time," says founder and president Barbara Mowat. The company opened a retail store in Sun Peaks, B.C., last year, continued with its trade-show
activities and relaunched its Web site last May. Ms. Mowat expects the site to be profitable by year-end.
Why is your business successful?
Because we established strategic alliances with America Online Canada, the Royal Bank of Canada and Canada Post. AOL Canada has driven a lot of traffic our way and will feature
us on their shopping channel next month. We constantly promote our E-commerce business and tie it to other channels, such as our retail store and trade-show business.
How do you attract business to your site?
The most significant factor has been the creation of strategic partnerships. Those relationships enhance our credibility with the shopping public.
Have you met your financial expectations ?
Uniquely Canada expanded its business to the Internet this May. Our earnings are in line with financial projections. We did less than $10,000 in sales in the first six months of 1999
but we expect to achieve revenues of $60,000 to $70,000 by year-end.
What was your biggest mistake in creating an on-line business?
We didn't purchase goods directly from the people who made them. Instead, we took customer orders, then looked for the merchandise to fill them. That was time-consuming and unfair
to our customers.
We failed to recognize that some products are hard to sell on the Web. It's very difficult and expensive to send a willow bed frame to Spain, for instance. The costs of international
shipping and handling are prohibitive and, before we took such orders, we should have ensured that it was doable.
What is your advice to E-commerce newcomers?

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

163/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Buy a software package with a template that allows you to develop your own site rather than paying a professional to create it from scratch. That route is expensive and there are no
guarantees it will succeed.
Watch out for cyber-predators who want to steal your ideas. Start small and join a marketing alliance. And remember that slower, controlled development is better than explosive
growth.
Just White Shirts and Black Socks Inc.
Mississauga, Ont. www .justwhiteshirtsandblacksocks.com [http://www.justwhiteshirtsandblacksocks.com/] Projected 1999 revenue: $2.5-million to $3-million
As its name suggests, Just White Shirts and Black Socks Inc. has developed a niche market in quality basics for men. Founded in 1994, the company expanded to the Internet in
April, 1998, to better serve its customers, says vice-president Michael Sachter.
Why is your business successful?
We clearly communicate our value proposition. Our shirts are beautifully tailored and reasonably priced. Managing the pace of change and staying in touch with the needs of our
customers is our first order of business. Many customers are moving to casual dress, so we recently created a line of more casual shirts.
How do you attract business to your site?
We build traffic through a mixture of word of mouth, Internet promotion and advertising in the conventional media. Our name is catchy and our promotional photo of three guys without
trousers appeals to people on a visual and humorous basis.
Have you met your financial expectations ?
This branch of our business has exceeded expectations . Since May, the proportion of customers ordering over the Internet has jumped from 27 per cent to 50 per cent.
What was your biggest mistake in creating an on-line business?
Initially, we didn't know the shirt business and, to satisfy our customers, we wound up giving away a lot of product. We should have spent more time ensuring consistent product quality
and been less trusting of buyers. We should also have established a Web presence earlier.
What is your advice to E-commerce newcomers?
Clearly define your goals and objectives and develop a group of supporters to help you remain objective as you create and launch your site. Plan a controlled site test so you can
assess the function and readiness of your offering before going fully live. Spend some time and money asking your customers what they want. And remember that your site requires
constant attention and adaptation.
Job Shark
Toronto www .jobshark.com [http://www.jobshark.com/] Projected 1999 revenue: "In the seven figures"
President Matthew von Teichman started Job Shark as a white-collar Internet employment service in 1997. It originally focused on the high-tech sector but now carries ads from a
wide range of companies.
Why is your business successful?
We plowed a large portion of our revenues into advertising, with radio ads providing the best returns. We expanded staff substantially, which gives us a strong presence across the
country, and put considerable money and energy into creating a corporate culture during a period of rapid growth.
How do you attract business to your site?
Keeping a constant eye on relationships with various search engines is vital. Different engines have different formats. For example, Yahoo Canada's staff evaluate the quality of your
site. Others do it electronically and when they change their parameters, so must we. It's a constant challenge to keep our name at the top of their lists.
Have you met your financial expectations ?
Financial projections for the first year were too lofty and we failed to meet them. However, we were almost 90 per cent above expectations last year and this year has seen 400-percent growth in revenue.
What was your biggest mistake in creating an on-line business?
We should have spent more time preparing and not been so quick to launch the site. We created a big fanfare right away and attracted a lot of attention when we should have waited
and tested the market a little longer. That would have helped us avoid some growing pains.
What is your advice to E-commerce newcomers?
Be sure you go into any E-commerce venture with sufficient capital. You may have a great site but if you don't have the money to advertise, market or maintain it, others with big bucks
may sweep up your idea and make a success of it.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv9o01de2

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

164/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Focus Column

Yes, Virginia, it is a different world
WILLIAM THORSELL
834 words
4 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A25
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

This is how the world has changed :
A costly half-page ad in The Wall Street Journal last Monday says, "There's a Reason Why You Have Two Kidneys. You Need One and So Does Someone Else."
A large graphic shows a cross-section of kidneys, and a subhead refers to "The world's largest, most successful donor laparoscopic kidney transplant program."
What is new about this?
-- A private, non-profit medical centre at the University of Maryland is promoting its business in the world's leading financial newspaper .
-- Medical technology to fight off organ rejection has developed to the point that unrelated individuals can now donate kidneys with a good chance that the kidneys will function for many
years in the recipient's body.
-- Laparoscopic surgery -- where most of the work is done inside the body via small incisions and remote controls -- significantly reduces the physical impact on donors of giving up one
of their kidneys for someone else.
-- The combination of new immuno-suppresive drugs and less invasive operating techniques has vastly expanded the market for kidney transplants. There are 42,570 Americans
registered for kidney transplants, but only about 8,500 kidneys are available from cadavers each year. Kidneys from younger, living people function almost twice as long on average as
those from cadavers, which have a half-life of only 8.6 years. It is now enough to be just a friend to rescue a person whose kidneys have failed.)
-- The expanded market for kidney transplants is now much easier to reach, inform and exploit through the Internet , bypassing family doctors and medical colleges everywhere. This
arresting ad invites readers to a detailed explanation of the program at www .umm.edu/kidney/ [http://www.umm.edu/kidney/] and encourages their participation.
-- The category of ".com" advertising in newspapers is only a couple of years old, but is now among the leading revenue generators for the "dead tree medium," highlighting the broad
marketing virtues of newspapers relative to the .com world and the symbiotic relationship between these media.
-- The use of a newspaper ad by the University of Maryland Medical System to attract traffic to its Web site (and many more ads like it) illustrates how the newspaper itself is
changing as an information medium. Newspapers were once "tertiary" information sources -- inert, one-way products permitting little scope for further action by their readers. Informed
pointers to Internet sites are transforming newspapers into a "gateway" medium, which directs readers to much more detailed and interactive places relating both to news and
advertising.
And so the Internet enormously enhances the utility of the newspaper . As the University of Maryland ad shows, some of the most compelling "gateway advertising" is noncommercial (though still very market-oriented).
Consider the management of money. On Tuesday, the American Stock Exchange took out a two-page ad in The Wall Street Journal announcing its new Web site for investors. "In order
for you to get to know our companies better and evaluate their individual potential, we've created a new Web site for that purpose. You'll be able to study and analyze these companies
at your convenience with complete and timely financials . . . earnings histories, analysts' reports, virtually everything you need to help you discover new investment opportunities."
( www .amex.com [http://www.amex.com/])
Many financial sites already offer this kind of information, including The Globe and Mail's mutual funds and investor sites, but now major stock exchanges are getting into independent
company profiles and the marketing of their own investment vehicles (such as index funds) to individuals. The role and power of the broker continues to fade. Companies such as
E*Trade charge as little as $4.95 (U.S.) for a stock order, which is likely to be grounded in information from the Net. The consequence again is a vast expansion of the market for
equities, driven by accessibility, information and lower costs.
And that summarizes how the world has changed : Markets are exploding in scope, transaction costs for buying and selling are plummeting, and market information sometimes meets
the economist's definition of "perfect." (An eminent Toronto art collector lamented at dinner last week that bargains are getting hard to find because sellers have such easy access to
accurate information on the real worth of their pieces.)
These factors are fuelling a low-inflation boom where many new goods and services expand the very definition of wealth (to include, for example, a new kidney). The Internet is less
than one decade old and heavily concentrated in a few industrialized countries. This market-exploding technology is barely beginning to wreak the productivity revolution that will
enrich and empower individuals everywhere, so this business cycle may still be early in its curve.
Ironically, creating profitable business cases on the Net remains difficult, except through capital gains on shares. The stock market is the engine of progress here, the fission reactor in
capitalism's finest hour.
E-mail: wthorsell@globeandmail.ca
Document glob000020010827dvc401r2c

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

165/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

TECHNOLOGY
Book Review

MR. POSTMAN DELIVERS A MESSAGE BUILDING A BRIDGE TO THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY: How the Past Can Improve
Our Future
JENEFER CURTIS
1769 words
20 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Neil Postman, chairman of the Department of Culture and Communications at New York University, wrote this book -- and 20 others like it -- with a pad of paper and a pen. He doesn't
own a computer, sees the Internet as "a mere distraction," doesn't use voice mail or call waiting (they are "uncivil") and, while he has access to a fax machine, he limits his use of it,
not fond of the urgency it suggests. For the record, his car has cruise control, but he says, "I have never used it since I do not find keeping my foot on the gas pedal a problem."
Postman explains his old-fashioned ways: "I will use technology when I judge it to be in my favour, I resist being used by it."
By Neil Postman Knopf, 193 pages, $35
When Swiss novelist Max Frisch said, "Technology is a way of organizing the world so that man doesn't have to experience it," Postman was listening. Just as he likes to control his
own car, Postman prefers to talk directly to the people in his life, to read books where the symbols of language call on his cognitive abilities rather than the mere "recognition" that
images require, and to see children retain some modicum of innocence before an omnipresent media forces them to grow up. As many critics have said, he is America's quintessential
humanist.
Yet, such a title only captures part of Postman's mandate. For 30 years, the Brooklyn-born son of a truck-driver has been churning out volumes in all the fields of language, education,
media and technology.
These books share, in addition to the dry wit that has become his hallmark, dour warnings around three themes -- first, what he calls "the triumph of one-eyed technology," how in
Cyclops-like fashion, technophiles see what is straight ahead of them and are blind to what their inventions are doing to our creativity, values and socialization process; second, "the
humiliation of the word," a phrase borrowed from French theorist Jacques Ellul to describe a decline of respect for the written word in the face of the barrage of visual forms of
communication; and finally, that it is up to the education system to try to counterbalance these forces.
Postman's sarcasm and his ability to vitalize the highly academic with a slice of everyday living make him delightfully readable. (Criticizing the image-dominated newspaper USA
Today, he envisions a time when we will give awards for "the best investigative sentence." In a famous exchange with U.S. culture theorist Camille Paglia, he explains about the second
commandment ("In the beginning was the Word . . .") that "Moses, with this commandment, was the first person who ever said, more or less, 'Don't watch TV; go do your homework.' "
However breezy Postman's prose may be, a sense of the foreboding lurks. Take his most famous book, Amusing Ourselves to Death (1985),a no-holds-barred castigation of television
that argues, in the tradition of Marshall McLuhan, that because TV is a visual medium, everything on its screen is entertainment, "one vast arena for show business," which is leading
us essentially to stop taking the world seriously. As animated as its pages are, they contain several chilling passages, such as, "In short, Orwell feared that what we hate will ruin us
(Big Brother) while Huxley feared what we love will ruin us. This book is about the possibility that Huxley, not Orwell, was right."
In Building a Bridge to the Eighteenth Century,Postman is at his sternest. While he hasn't given up completely, he's given up on this century. "Is it not true that the 20th century has
been an unrelieved horror?" he asks, positing that we are without "gods to serve, hollow and anxious, distrusting language, lacking conviction, suspicious of truth." His answer? We
should look back, specifically to the 18th century, for it is there, where the Enlightenment was challenged by the romantics of the counter-Enlightenment, that we shall find a "humane
direction" for our 21st century. Goethe, Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, Kant, Hume, Gibbon and Thomas Paine didn't just bring us progress, he argues, but raised important questions
about it, "especially about the connection between technological and moral progress."
In fact, there is much in the 18th century that speaks to our 20th-century angst, and Postman is right to point us in this direction. But so intent is he on advancing his agenda (chapter
titles are Progress, Technology, Language, Information, Narratives, Children, Democracy and Educacation -- his pet topics from other books) and airing his complaints about our
century, that he often manipulates his material to fit his thesis.
Take, for example, his chapter on language. In an effort to arm us against the abuses of propaganda, Postman stresses the complex relationship between language and reality -- how,
put simply, language essentially creates our perceptions of reality, making a "world of words" separate from reality, the "world of non-words." The Enlightenment, says Postman, was
the Age of Prose, of expository prose that helped to provide a "truer representation of reality than ever before."
This sets Postman up for an ill-informed attack on postmodernism and the field of deconstructionism, which he likens to a "form of mental illness." ("You can get a PhD in this sort of
thing.") His argument is that deconstructionism is simply "a continuation of Enlightenment thought" in its recognition of the limits of language to represent reality. But, he claims, its belief
that "there is no reality to represent" reduces it to "nonsense." It's a very cursory interpretation that would have both Diderot and Derrida turning in their graves.
He is on firmer ground in his chapter on children. One of Postman's most original books, The Disappearance of Childhood (1979), argues that childhood as a category was born with
the printing press, which created adulthood (those who could read) and hence childhood (those who couldn't read). In the same way, TV, with its visual, non-hierarchical nature (anyone
can understand it) has caused childhood to disappear completely: five-year-olds watch condom commercials and wars. The new book extends that argument to all information
technology: "What does a forty-year-old have to teach a twelve-year-old if both of them have been seeing the same TV programs, the same movies, the same new shows, listening to
the same CDs and calling forth the same information from the Internet ?"
He applauds the 18th century, particularly some of the writing of John Locke (who died in 1704) and Rousseau, which helped preserve the wonder and innocence of childhood and the
very category itself. Today, though, "children are neither blank slates nor budding plants. They are markets . . . consumers whose need for products are roughly the same as adults."
One of Postman's loudest complaints is the transformation of the meaning of the word "information." He stands in nostalgic awe of the 18th century when, as he sees it, information had
a purpose -- you passed it along because it helped your friend do something. (Diderot wrote essays on the different methods of catching fish worms, we are told.) Today, we are
concerned solely with the moving of information and getting more of it to more people in more diverse forms. Not only do we have no purpose for it, but we have created an information
glut of "garbage proportions."
And, he asks, what problems does all this information solve? Did Iraq invade Kuwait because of a lack of information? Does homelessness exist because of a lack of information? Is
your relationship on the brink for lack of information? No, what ails us the most has nothing to do with the sort of information made accessible by computers and the like.
Postman believes that the 18th century's greatest gift is skepticism, the incredulous reaction of Hume, poets Blake and Shelley and others, to the rationalist assumptions of the
Enlightenment. In the book's last chapter, Postman offers five ways teachers should teach "skepticism based on reason," including teaching students how to ask good questions, rather
than how to learn answers. (What if, for example, those studying history were to ask, "Whose history is this?" or, "Whose definition is this?") This is Postman the radical, the author of
Teaching as as Subversive Activity (1969), who wanted schools to be "training grounds for subversion."

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

166/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Critics often accuse Postman of describing society's ills without offering solutions. To his credit, he offers answers here, placing high expectations on both education and the
newspaper industry (the latter should run "wisdom pages" as opposed to mere information pages). Postman also refers frequently to the Internet in this book, a subject that, until
now, he seems to have taken great joy in ignoring.
In his own way, Postman has a Cyclops mindset, seeing only the problems technology brings and ignoring its gains -- for example, as Peter Drucker notes in the October Atlantic
Monthly, thanks to computer software, a piano-tuning now takes 20 minutes rather than three hours, and one engineer can design buildings in a a couple of days, rather than 25
engineers taking two months.
Similarly, when it comes to his list of villainous authors, he should read the fine print . In Being Digital , a book Postman scolds constantly, Nicholas Negroponte explains that he
decided to write a book because multimedia offers too little to the imagination. By contrast, writes Negroponte, "the written word sparks images and evokes metaphors that get much of
their meaning from the reader's imagination and experiences. When you read a novel, much of the color, sound and motion come from you." Postman couldn't have said it better
himself.
That said, every society needs its technological conscience, and Postman performs the role well. Of course there are others who help and have helped him -- Harold Innis, McLuhan,
Jacques Ellul, Daniel Boorstin, author of The Image and, more recently, Clifford Stoll, author of Silicon Snake Oil. But none of these have synthesized the learned with the everyday in
such an engaging way, all the while spotting commonalities from a huge range of life experiences, as Postman has. McLuhan, urging us to cultivate our own technological conscience
sooner than later, writes, "the future of the future is the present." Maybe it's also in the past.
Jenefer Curtis is an Ottawa journalist and speechwriter. She is writing a graduate thesis on Neil Postman's work.
Document glob000020010827dvbk01o77

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

167/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

TECHNOLOGY AT HOME
Special Report

It's a digital Christmas You can't get more cutting-edge this year than to stack the tree with digital scanners, cameras, video
disk players.
ANN KERR
1672 words
29 November 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
H1
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

What techno-toy can you give this Christmas that'll be a hit without taking until June to pay for?
You can't get more cutting edge this year than to stack the bottom of the Christmas tree with digital scanners, cameras and video disk players -- gadgets that enable their owners to
get more out of their home-entertainment systems.
It's a good bet the recipient won't already have these items. Until now, these digital products have all been a little too trying or a lot too costly to go mass market. Now, however,
they're simpler to operate, with superior results -- and you may be able to pay off the bill by March.
Maybe it's a sign of growing comfort with computer technology, a booming economy or even millennium fever that makes us want to push the edge a bit, says Michael Givens, a buyer
with Bay Bloor Radio of Toronto, a leading high-end electronics store.
In any case, from the never-ending Pokemon phenomenon to teen-targeted portable MP3 players that download music from the Net, digital gifts are in. Here's what industry experts
foresee this holiday season:
DVD player
After all the hype of the past couple of years, finally, "it's going to be a DVD Christmas," says Mr. Givens. "DVD players are selling faster than VCRs ever did in their first years. In fact,
the problem is getting enough product to meet the demand, he says."
The Consumer Electronics Marketers of Canada, based in Mississauga, estimates total 1999 sales of about 160,000 units, one-third of that during the Christmas rush. In the United
States, predictions run to three million.
What makes DVD, which has video and audio quality far beyond that of a VCR or CD player, so special this season? For one thing, there's a huge selection now for between $450 and
$800, with big sellers including the Sony DVP-S330 (from Toronto-based Sony of Canada Ltd.), Panasonic DVD-A120 (from Panasonic Canada Inc. of Mississauga) and Toshiba
SD2109 (from Toronto-based Toshiba of Canada Ltd.). If you're feeling especially generous, you could opt for Sony's DVP CX850D, which can store 200 movies and/or music CDs, for
about $1,400.
There also are a huge number of movies now on DVD format, although you still can't record like you can with a VCR.
If you're buying for an audiophile, consider waiting until next year, when new models will feature even more advanced DVD audio software. Of course, the price will rise, too, well above
the $1,000 range.
Home theatre
To provide the ultimate video experience, think not only better, but bigger.
"The superior picture quality of DVD and satellite systems such as ExpressVu are helping to fuel the industry trend to larger-screen televisions," says Brian Lang, product manager for
TV and DVD with Panasonic Canada.
The fastest-selling screen size over all is the 27-inch, tube-based set. However, more consumers this year are opting for even larger, pricier models, Mr. Lang says, "starting at $1,000
for 32 inches and, from there, the sky's the limit."
You could make someone special happy, say, by parting with $17,500 for a 75-pound, three-inch-deep, 42-inch-wide plasma display panel from Toshiba.
Digital scanner
"This category is just exploding; we're selling thousands upon thousands of scanners," says Francis Li, category manager for computer hardware at Business Depot in Markham, Ont.
If you have a home-office worker on your list, $749.99 will buy a Hewlett-Packard 6350C (from Hewlett-Packard Canada Ltd. of Mississauga), which comes with an automatic document
feeder, higher resolution and faster scanning.
But the biggest home market for Business Depot is for lower-end models from IBM Canada Ltd. of Markham, Canon Canada Inc. of Mississauga and Hewlett- Packard that are priced
under $150 and used mostly for scanning family photos into a computer and then E-mailing them to relatives.
The frustration level and return rate on scanners used to be huge but improvements in installation software have made them much easier to use. Still, don't expect them to be
anywhere as fast as a photocopier or able to produce good printouts, unless you're using a superior model with a high-resolution inkjet printer.
Digital camera
Like scanners, improved performance and pricing make digital cameras a choice pick this year.
The most successful brands for Business Depot are all well under $1,000 and, apart from Sony, are established in conventional photography -- companies such as Kodak Canada Inc.
of Toronto, Canon, Olympus Optical Co. Ltd. of Japan and Fuji Photo Film Co. Ltd. of Japan, Mr. Li says.
But all kinds of companies are trying to snap up part of the burgeoning market, and there's something for every age group.
From Mattel Canada Inc. of Toronto, there are Barbie and Nick Click digital cameras, which cost about $100 each and are basically point-and-click cameras for ages six and up. The
kits come with a PC-link cable to transfer images to a computer, where kids can do minor editing and paste their faces onto a character such as a fashion model or astronaut, ostensibly
all on their own.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

168/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

A more sophisticated model geared at preteens is the black and yellow Jam C@m, by KB Gear of Eden Prairie, Minn., selling for closer to $150. It stores up to 24 pictures, produces
800 x 600 dots per inch (dpi) resolution and comes with photo-editing software from Microsoft Canada Co. of Mississauga with which you can stretch images and get other effects.
One of the big digital sellers for older shutterbugs is the Kodak DC 210+, at about $600, which has a liquid-crystal-display screen so you can see how the image will look on your
computer screen before you take the picture. It also has one-megapixel resolution, which means you can print a photo up to 5 x 7 inches and get good picture quality.
At Bay Bloor Radio, meanwhile, the biggest draws in digital cameras start at $1,500.
Photo-quality printer
Why not go whole hog and top up that snazzy digital camera with a printer such as HP's new inkjet P1000? For about $600, you can load your digital "film" directly into the printer,
produce a thumbnail photo sheet of all your shots, then specify which pictures you want to print at what size and how many copies.
Personal computer
Basic cheap models are popular, such as the emachine, made by emachines Inc. of Irvine, Calif., and priced from as low as $375 at Future Shop, with features such as 366
megahertz, CD-ROM and Net connection.
"At that price, we're seeing people buy who haven't been in the market before or [who] want a second computer for the kids. Some want it to combine with a digital camera, as an
affordable gift for the whole family," says Eric Ommundsen, project manager and head of corporate communications at Future Shop Ltd. in Vancouver.
Also hot are the Compaq 5477 from Compaq Computer Corp. of Houston and the HP 6545, which come with a CD-RW (writable CD-ROM drive). With this technology, you can make
your own audio or data CDs and record numerous times. But the system doesn't come cheaply, at about $1,500.
In PC games software, the best bets are the most recent sports titles from Electronic Arts Inc. of Redwood City, Calif., according to Shawn Pauliszyn, manager at the CompuCentre
store at Calgary's Market Mall, or a space-combat sequel that has gamers buzzing -- Diablo 2, by Blizzard Entertainment of Irvine.
Video-game console
It was supposed to be the Christmas of the Sega Dreamcast, priced at about $300, the first next-generation console to take gaming to greater heights. But retailers are reporting that a
shortage of peripherals such as extra controllers is hurting sales for Sega Enterprises Ltd. of Japan.
In fact, heading Wal-Mart Stores' list of high-tech gifts are the old Sony Playstation and Nintendo 64 (made by Nintendo Co. Ltd. of Japan) systems.
Pokemon
Like it or not, the world-wide phenomenon that has arisen from Nintendo's Game Boy hand-held unit shows no signs of abating. Mr. Pauliszyn, for one, predicts that the new Yellow
version of the game, and the colour Game Boy itself, will be the most sought items at his store.
There's even an interactive I Choose You Pikachu doll, based on the most popular Pokemon character, from Hasbro Inc. of Pawtucket, R.I. Its ears wiggle, its mouth moves and its
cheeks light up. It's geared at children four and up, and costs $40 to $45.
Other good bets
Sears, one of the country's biggest retailers of children's toys, is also reporting great catalogue sales of Intel/Mattel products such as the Intel Play QX3 Digital Video Microscope, from
Toronto-based Intel of Canada Ltd., for ages six to 12. With this $160 computer microscope and software, the kids may actually become interested in science. They can capture video
and still images of bugs and other objects, create time-lapse movies, produce posters and send the results over the Internet to bug-eyed friends.
For teens, Mr. Ommundsen says, there's the MP3 player, which lets them download compressed digital music files from the Net. The size of a Sony Walkman, the player stores up to
60 minutes of tunes, with 12 hours of playback.
Brands include the Diamond Rio from Diamond Multimedia Systems of San Jose for about $200, and the RCA Lyra from RCA Inc. of Toronto for $329.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvbt01q9y

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

169/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

NEWS

Cutting through a Web of prejudice --- Disabled Chinese who `lost her spring bloom' fights on to become Miss Internet
Matt Pottinger
913 words
23 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
NE19
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

`Even if I get last place, it doesn't matter. People will turn on their TV sets, see me and say: That's impossible. By the time they turn their sets off I want them to say: This is normal.'
Miss Internet winner Chen Fanhong SHANGHAI, China - When official organizers dreamed up the idea of China's first "Miss Internet " competition, they envisioned a winner with the
mind of a computer programmer and the body of a beauty queen.
Smart and shapely, she would be a television role model to encourage more Chinese women to venture on-line. So when Chen Fanhong burst into contention, the organizers
determined she must be stopped.
Chen had sailed through the qualifying rounds with an easy mastery of Web design and a knack for surfing cyberspace. But she is disabled: A battle against bone cancer has left her
temporarily using a wheelchair.
In words that hurt more than her excruciating cancer treatment, the official in charge told her sternly: "You have lost your spring bloom." She could attend the finals, she was told, but
only as a "specially invited" observer.
How this frail 24-year-old used a laptop and modem to fight prejudice and ignorance - and eventually claim the winner's crown as the people's choice - speaks volumes about the power
of the Internet to change China.
Having breezed through the provincial round of the competition, whose sponsors included Swedish telecommunications giant Ericsson, Chen could hardly believe her ears when the
organizer told her she was spoiled goods.
"He didn't even try sugar-coating," she said.
Finalists would be required
to perform aerobic exercises The televised final in Shanghai would require contestants to fish out obscure information from the Web, design and e-mail a greeting card and answer
trivia questions. But, the official told her, there would also be aerobic exercises to "appraise the physiques of the contestants."
"How could you possibly try to compare yourself with normal people?" he demanded to know, adding that there was no room for people like her, using a stock Chinese word for
"disabled" that translates literally as "damaged and diseased."
Said Chen: "I cried for the first time since the operation. Chinese people think it's unhealthy to be in a wheelchair. They feel extremely uncomfortable, which is strange because I feel
absolutely normal."
Chen was ready to call it quits, and so were her parents, nervous about a recurrence of her cancer. In July, she had undergone surgery to fit a steel replacement part into her pelvis,
where doctors had discovered two large tumours.
Instead she wrote an impassioned essay and posted it on her Web site.
"The Internet is the Internet . It's no substitute for the real world. I thought I could walk into the real world through the Internet , but found that the door to the real world was shut," she
wrote.
A newly minted chemical engineer when she was struck down by cancer, Chen soon came across medical uses for the Internet . On her back for six months last year recovering from
an earlier operation, she set up a Web site packed with information about bone disorders and persuaded doctors at a Shanghai orthopedic hospital to dispense advice in her chat room.
Chen's exploits as a `Web Worm' helped police nab a robber Her other exploits as a "Web Worm," as surfers are popularly known in China, included piecing together a digital mug
shot from video clips of a man in glasses and fake beard robbing a bank in her hometown of Ningbo. The culprit was picked up within days at a gas station by police carrying a printout
of her composite photo.
She has also begun writing a novel modelled after the literary kung fu stories of Chinese author Jin Yong, to be first published - where else? - on the Internet .
So when she came across a Web announcement for a Miss Internet contest, naturally she signed up, inspired by the stated goal of getting more Chinese women on-line. Of the 4.5
million Internet users in China, 85 per cent are men.
After she was ejected from the competition, a newspaper in the nearby city of Hangzhou picked up her essay and printed the story. Dozens of newspaper and television stories
followed and e-mails poured in to Chen's Web site (http://fchen.yeah.net [http://fchen.yeah.net]), which registered more than 1,000 hits a day.
Within a week, the beleaguered organizing committee had issued an apology and invited Chen back into the competition this month.
"Even if I get last place, it doesn't matter," she said. "People will turn on their TV sets, see me and say, `That's impossible.' By the time they turn their sets off I want them to say, `This is
normal.' "
A panel of 10 judges declared Chen "Miss Internet ." Journalists swarmed on to the stage, where she sat calmly, clutching a bouquet of roses.
"An Internet friend had asked whether I'm able to stand up," she said. "Just now I did, and it was my happiest moment."
WINNING `WEB WORM': Chen Fanhong's victory in the country's first Miss contest, despite using a wheelchair during her battle against bone cancer, has shown the technology's power to attitudes in
China.
Document tor0000020010830dvcn01ag4

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

170/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Rough ride for ruble --- Explosion at refinery fires oil prices to 22-month high
THE STAR'S WIRE SERVICES
1063 words
10 August 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Oil prices stormed to 22-month highs yesterday after a blast at a U.S. refinery boosted a market already strengthened by tight producer compliance with output curbs.
Benchmark Brent crude for September delivery closed in London at $20.51 (U.S.) per barrel, up 45 cents and the highest level seen since Oct. 9, 1997.
Later, in New York, West Texas intermediate crude rose 38 cents to $21.26 a barrel.
The explosion at Citgo Petroleum Corp.'s refinery in Corpus Christi, Texas, killed one worker and injured another.
Brent breached the psychological $20 mark on Friday on fresh evidence of output restraint from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and a recovery in refinery profit
margins that should shore up demand for crude.
The rise was also driven by Russian export curbs, a rally in U.S. gasoline markets and reports of a fall in U.S. oil inventories.
GM seeks new trial
General Motors Corp. has asked a California judge for a new trial in the record $4.9 billion (U.S.) jury award to six people burned in 1993 when their GM car exploded after being hit by
a drunk driver.
A Los Angeles Superior Court jury ruled against the world's Number 1 auto maker last month and granted the largest U.S. product liability award ever to the family of Patricia Anderson.
"This award is excessive and unconstitutional by every measure. There has literally never been anything like it before," GM said in its court filing yesterday. "Nothing justifies this
award."
GM said the jury was not allowed to hear that the driver in the accident was drunk nor the low rate of deaths from fires in the cars like the Anderson family's, a 1979 Chevrolet Malibu.
Brian Panish, the family's lawyer, argued the fuel tank was too close to the rear bumper and insufficiently protected from explosions.
GM's motion for a new trial and an earlier motion asking the court to reverse the jury's verdict are scheduled to be argued in court in Los Angeles Aug. 26.
Wage concessions sought
Miner Highland Valley Copper says it will mothball its unprofitable mine in British Columbia if unionized workers refuse to accept wage concessions when labour talks resume this week.
Highland Valley, Canada's largest open-pit base-metals operation, closed in May after negotiations between management and representatives of the United Steelworkers failed to
produce a new contract.
The two sides have agreed to meet with provincial mediators today. Highland Valley spokesperson Trevor Phelps said a deal would hinge on the United Steelworkers of America Local
7619 agreeing to tie members' wages to the price of copper. The union represents 770 of the mine's nearly 1,000 workers.
Highland Valley, a partnership among Cominco Ltd., Teck Corp., Rio Algom Ltd. and Highmont Mining Co., is demanding wage cuts up to 15 per cent if copper falls to 60 cents a pound.
No wage cuts would be required if copper stabilized at 68 cents a pound.
Internet goes postal
Two California companies, Stamps.com Inc. and E-Stamp Corp., have gained U.S. Postal Service approval to sell postage over the Internet , the first time in 80 years that commercial
businesses have been allowed to offer a new form of postage.
It's postage with "no licking, no sticking, just clicking," Patricia Gibert, retail vice-president for the postal service, told reporters in Washington yesterday.
The two companies let customers print postage from their computers at home or in the office, avoiding waits in line at the post office or shelling out for a postage meter. "The digital
revolution will change the postage industry forever," Stamps.com chief executive officer John Payne said in a statement. Customers buy monthly postage packages over the
company's Web site ( www .stamps.com [http://www.stamps.com/]). A laser or inkjet printer prints a bar code directly on the envelope. Because the postal service would not allow
postage to be stored on a hard drive for fear of theft, Stamps.com users must be logged on to the Internet to get their stamps.
E-Stamp requires the purchase of a separate hardware "vault" the size of a roll of stamps that jacks into the back of a computer and stores postage data.
E-Stamp users log on at www .e-stamp.com [http://www.e-stamp.com/] and purchase postage in blocks of $500 (U.S.).
NBC links with Net2Phone
NBC is taking an equity stake in Net2Phone Inc., a company that provides phone service over the Internet , in exchange for prominent placement of links on the network's top Web
sites.
Visitors to the NBC.com, Snap.com and NBC Interactive Neighborhood Web sites will be able to search yellow and white page phone listings and click any listing to automatically dial
the number using Net2Phone's service, the companies said yesterday.
In return, NBC, the broadcasting unit of General Electric, and Snap.com will acquire an equity stake in Net2Phone, with NBC gaining the right to nominate a board member to
Net2Phone's board of directors. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.
The service provided by Net2Phone, based in Hackensack, N.J., requires a caller to have a computer with speakers and a microphone, and the company's free software. The recipient
does not need a computer and can pick up the call on a regular phone line. Net2Phone charges less than 5 cents (U.S.) a minute for domestic calls anywhere in the United States.
Snap.com, a joint venture between NBC and online media company CNET, is slated to be merged with NBC.com and other properties later this year to form NBC Internet .
Ivanhoe Mines steps back

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

171/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Vancouver-based junior miner Ivanhoe Mines is reducing its stake in a central Asian gold mining project, citing low gold prices.
Yesterday the company said it has amended a 1996 deal with the Kazakhstan government to acquire the Bakyrchik Mine, returning a 30 per cent stake in the project to the government
and saving the company about $30 million (U.S.).
An exchange office employee the numbers on currency conversion rates in Moscow yesterday as the Russian ruble weakened after President Boris Yeltsin fired Prime Minister Sergei Stepashin.
Document tor0000020010830dv8a00rzh

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

172/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Security alert a headache for online firms
The Toronto Star
854 words
8 December 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

AWARNING on Canada Trust's Web site - and subsequent publicity on CBC radio - has alerted people to a security problem that may affect Internet banking and retailing on and after
Jan. 1.
"Important notice: Security alert," says the trust company at www .cana [http://www.cana/]
datrust.com/nscert/95.html.
"This is not a Y2K issue, nor is it a Canada Trust issue, but it is a problem which requires your attention and action prior to Dec. 31, 1999."
Sounds alarming? Don't worry.
The security threat is minimal.
Yet it's a public relations headache for the electronic commerce industry, which is struggling to gain consumer acceptance.
And it couldn't have happened at a worse time.
The problem will hit computer users with older Web browsers - specifically Netscape browsers prior to Navigator 4.05 or Microsoft Internet Explorer 4.01 for Macintosh.
Between 25 and 40 per cent of Canadian computer users have these older browsers, says Chris Voice, director of product management for Entrust Technologies Inc. in Ottawa.
If you have an older browser, you will get a scary message (a dialogue box) when you connect to a secure Internet site after New Year's Eve.
It will tell you the certificate authority that identifies the site for encryption purposes has expired.
Please note: The site is still secure and you can do your banking or shopping as before.
However, you will get the same warning on subsequent visits unless you update your browser. This means downloading a new version free from Netscape or Microsoft.
Every e-commerce site that offers secure transactions uses a digital certificate to provide encryption and reassure Web users that the site is authentic.
AT&T Corp., CyberTrust and VeriSign Inc. have certificates that last for five years and expire on Jan. 1, 2000.
While all three companies have installed new certificates in newer browsers and alerted e-commerce sites to the problem, there are still thousands of certificates that must be replaced.
This isn't a big technical problem, says Carl Howe of Forrester Research Inc. in Boston.
"If users just click on the `continue' button, commerce sites will still encrypt and complete their transactions.
"But online companies must actively address the problem to prevent consumers from flooding post-Christmas support lines."
Online retailers will still be handling gift returns when the certificates expire, Howe says in a research brief.
"New Internet shoppers will phone customer support to complain or shop on-line elsewhere - even though the retailer is blameless."
This minor problem will confuse customers and tarnish online retailers with more serious Y2K claims.
The Y2K bug can hit older computers and software that fail to recognize the year 2000 because they record dates by only the last two digits. Certificate issuers normally set an expiry
date to remind users to keep up with changes . Many of them picked the last day of 1999 as an obvious date before Y2K became a big issue.
On Jan. 1, consumers will be looking for Y2K mishaps and journalists may use these incidents as evidence of Y2K problems, Howe says, though they have nothing to do with Y2K.
"Security concerns are already the Number 1 impediment to e-commerce," says Voice of Entrust Technologies. "This will play into it."
Entrust, an e-commerce provider spun off by Nortel Networks Corp. in 1997, issues digital certificates that expire in 2020. Equifax Inc. and Thawte Consulting Inc. have certificates
that expire in 2010.
Retailers can go to Entrust's Web site ( www .entrust.net [http://www.entrust.net/]) and pay $300 (U.S.) to replace the certificate used in their browser.
"It's an investment in preserving a good relationship with customers," Voice says.
The big worry: What if customers decide not to update their browsers and simply click by the warnings?
Entrust says it's dangerous for computer users to ignore warning messages.
"If users are encouraged or trained to ignore important security warning messages, they are exposing themselves to potential fraud by Internet hackers," the company says on its Web
site.
However, updating a browser is a time-consuming chore. New browsers like Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.0 (which is 90 megabytes) can take hours to download over the Internet .
Computer users may be reluctant to invest the time, which means the certificate expiration problem won't go away for a while. It could continue until the last Netscape 4.05 and earlier
browsers stop being used.
Retailers should send customers to Web pages that check whether they need a certificate update, Howe says, and add a money-saving coupon to encourage them to do the update.
"Every consumer who updates now is one fewer customer who will complain on New Year's Day - and one less hassle to deal with after Y2K."
---

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

173/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Ellen Roseman's column appears Monday, Wednesday and Friday. You can reach her by writing Your Business c/o The Toronto Star, 1 Yonge St. Toronto M5E 1E6, or by phone at
(416) 945-8687 or by fax at (416) 865-3630 or at erosema@thestar.ca by e-mail.
Document tor0000020010830dvc8018tk

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

174/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

PERSONAL FINANCE
Report on Business: Investing

How to use the Web to research a stock WEB SITES
ROB CARRICK
994 words
27 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B6
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Say what you want about Newbridge Networks Corp., it sure knows how to keep analysts in line.
A strong majority of analysts like the Kanata, Ont.-based maker of communications equipment, even though it has an alarming tendency to disappoint with its quarterly earnings.
The analysts' consensus on Newbridge wasn't found on an expensive financial news service such as Bloomberg, although it easily could have been. Actually, it was found on the
World Wide Web and it didn't cost a cent.
If you know where to look on the Web, you can uncover a surprisingly varied amount of information about stocks traded on Canadian, U.S. and even global stock exchanges.
Corporate news releases and basic financial data are easily found, and you can graph and chart stock prices until your mouse finger goes numb. Analyst opinions are harder to come
by, but they're out there on the Web.
What follows is a demonstration of how the Web may be used to research Newbridge's stock. The bias here is toward free sites, but the reality is that most sites charge for their juiciest
information.
-- News releases: All of Newbridge's releases going back to late 1997 are available from Carlson Online . Carlson offers one-stop shopping since its data base includes the big three
disseminators of corporate news -- Canada NewsWire, Canadian Corporate News and ISDN.
-- Regulatory filings: For Canadian companies, head to SEDAR (System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval). SEDAR has downloadable news releases, material change
reports, earnings statements, management circulars and proxy statements for Newbridge dating back to March 20, 1997.
Newbridge is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, so it has to file to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as well. For SEC filings, try Microsoft Investor's stock research
page or Quicken.ca's investment research centre.
-- Annual reports: Quicken.ca's investment research centre includes a link to Investor Communications Business Inc., which will mail free annual reports for thousands of Canadian,
U.S. and British companies, including Newbridge.
-- Company profiles and research: These generally comprise a paragraph or two of background on a company, plus a financial review of varying thoroughness. For Canadian stocks,
the best bet is Quicken.ca. Its Newbridge profile rates highly because it includes data on share earnings, price-earnings ratios, revenue and profit or loss going back to 1988. Detailed
financial information for the past three fiscal years is also available.
For U.S. companies, and Canadian firms listed on U.S. exchanges, try Quicken.com, which is the American version of Quicken.ca, or 411Stocks. Both sites had writeups on Newbridge
because it's listed on the NYSE.
Carlson's free services include access to 500 research reports from an outfit called Wright's Investors' Service Inc. For Newbridge, the Wright's report includes financial data and ratios
going to 1989. For a much broader collection of Wright's reports, check out Site-by-Site's amazingly diverse global investing site.
-- Analysts' opinions: The Zacks site offers all kinds of services for paid subscribers, but it also has a free services section that spits out corporate snapshots with a summary of
analysts' recommendations. Newbridge scores five "strong buys," 10 "moderate buys," two "holds" and one "moderate sell." There are also quarterly and annual consensus earnings
estimates.
Quicken.com obviously includes a different gang of analysts because its breakdown for Newbridge is eight "strong buys," 13 "buys" and eight "holds." A shorter summary of analysts'
views can be found on the 411Stocks site.
-- Graphing: Newbridge or any other Canadian and U.S. stock and stock market index can be graphed on Big Charts. You can pick virtually any period for your graphs and focus on
anything from share price to such technical indicators as bollinger bands, moving averages and fast and slow stochastics. Imoney also has reasonably good graphing capabilities, as
does Quicken.com.
-- Sifting and sorting: The Stockgroup site allows you to do searches for companies according to their market capitalization, the price range of their stock and 52-week highs and lows.
You can scan all the major Canadian and U.S. exchanges -- nine in total. This site also lets you call up a list of the 50 most active stocks on the same exchanges.
-- Short positions: Carlson's deluxe service offers this. Canstock, another pay site, also lists short positions as part of its services.
-- Insider trading: A site called Stockscape has reports for companies listed on the Vancouver Stock Exchange and promises to add more exchanges in the future . Let's hope so. It
seems impossible to find insider reports for TSE-listed companies on the Web.
-- Whisper numbers: Analysts and a fortunate few investors traffic in these unofficial earnings estimates. The rest of us can go to EarningsWhispers.com about three or four weeks in
advance of a company's reporting date. U.S.-listed companies only. It wasn't close enough to Newbridge's next reporting date for there to be anything on the company.
-- An all-in-one toolbox: The CBS Marketwatch site has one for U.S.-listed stocks that groups seven information sources.
-- Want more? The Media4 Investment Centre has enough research-related links to keep you busy for days.
Comments and suggestions are welcomed at rcarrick@globeandmail.ca
Web sites mentioned in this article:
http://investor.msn.com/research/welcome.asp
Document glob000020010827dv3r00g67

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

175/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Labour unions no longer fear high tech --- Internet can ensure people have job opportunities
Deborah Zabarenko
767 words
7 September 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

WASHINGTON - True or false: The high-tech world spells doom for U.S. labour unions.
Unions and the U.S. labour department say this statement is false - and getting more so as the United States moves past yesterday's Labour Day holiday toward a marketplace
increasingly driven by high technology.
At the same time, the Internet offers unaffiliated workers new ways to look for jobs. Unions are using the Internet to organize and communicate, with Web sites and e-mail exploited
in bargaining campaigns, said Candice Johnson, a spokesperson for the 630,000-member Communications Workers of America, or CWA.
Traditionally the union of telephone company employees, the CWA is now reaching out to California's Silicon Valley and has sparked interest among workers at such Internet giants as
Microsoft Corp. and Amazon.com Inc., Johnson said in a telephone interview.
"Going back at least 10 years or so, we've been working at ensuring our members are going to be able to move into the jobs of the future ," Johnson said. Using the Internet "is one
way you make sure that people have the job opportunity and employment security, because technology is moving so fast."
CWA has its own Web site - www .cwa-union.org [http://www.cwa-union.org/]- and also puts together Web pages specifically targeted to individual companies and industries. It also
communicates with members and those seeking to join the union by sending e-mail to personal e-mail accounts, Johnson said.
Fifty-seven per cent of
all unionized workers
have home computers
One member group of high-tech workers in Washington state, washte
ch.org, is seeking to make sick pay, holiday pay and "decent medical coverage" basic workplace rights.
Such benefits are common among some union workers, but rare among so-called "permatemps" at Microsoft and other high-tech firms. Permatemps are classified as temporary
workers, but some work for the same company for years, without the same benefits as permanent employees.
It makes sense for unions to use the Internet , because 57 per cent of all unionized workers have home computers, according to a 1999 survey cited by the AFL-CIO, the U.S. labour
federation that represents 13 million workers.
The unionized share of the U.S. workforce started declining in the 1960s and the sag accelerated in the 1980s as the nation's industrial base shrank and former U.S. president Ronald
Reagan set a hostile tone for labour relations by firing all striking federal air traffic controllers in 1981. But one grassroots organization in San Jose, Calif., sees the possibility of a new
kind of union aimed at clerical and technical employees in Silicon Valley.
"As goes this valley, so goes America," said Amy Dean, a spokesperson for Working Partnerships USA, which plans to launch its new "membership organization" in October. "And the
point is that almost 40 per cent of employees in this valley work under nonstandard work arrangements."
The new group will aim to assure portable health benefits for workers who move quickly from one job to another, as well as provide training opportunities and other support, Dean said.
"It's not your father's union."
This is in line with a U.S. labour department report on the future employment picture, which looks for an increasingly high-tech workforce .
"By 2006, nearly half of all U.S. workers will be employed in industries that produce or intensively use information technology, products and services, according to U.S. commerce
department projections," it said.
Job-seekers need not wait until the new millennium to look for work online , with an array of Internet -based services already available, including monster.com and careerpath.com
and dozens of others.
Still, the Internet has a way to go before it replaces the "Help Wanted" ads in newspapers as the method most workers use to look for jobs, said Chris Charron of the Cambridge,
Mass.-based Forrester research firm. He said online job searches will overtake newspaper searches in five years or so. He said the Internet may not be entirely hospitable to
unions at this point, but could become so.
"I think on the whole, the Internet at this point fractionalizes the worker rather than bringing the worker together," Charron said. "In time we'll start to see a tighter fabric among workers
on the Internet . But for now the Internet is a place of self-reliance."
RONALD REAGAN: Former U.S. president set a hostile tone for labour relations in the 1980s.
Document tor0000020010830dv9700u0g

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

176/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

CARS & TOYS
The Arts

Telephony calling Computer may soon replace the phone
RACHEL COPPOLA
900 words
27 September 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C10
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

There's been rotary and touch tone, cordless and cell and a pair of Spaghetti-O's cans on a string. So what's next? It may sound strange, but the home computer is fast becoming the
telephone of the future . Worldwide, users are booting up their personal computers and making long distance PC-to-PC phone calls over the Internet for free.
Of course, they have to have a computer and Internet access, which generally means paying monthly fees that can range from about $10 to $50 for Internet access. But most users
were doing that already. Beyond that, some are attaching inexpensive Netcams and communicating face-to-face with faraway friends and relatives.
Adnan Zia, who lives in Toronto, has been making long-distance phone calls to Pakistan, Canada and the United States from his home computer for a year now, and he said he will
continue using the technology as long as it's free.
Zia doesn't have any super-fancy, turbocharged hardware. He makes his calls using "an average Pentium PC" that's almost a year old and is hooked up to a 56K modem.
He bumped into telephony technology while he was looking through the different program files included in his Microsoft Office 97 suite and found NetMeeting, one of the first
tele/videoconferencing programs to appear on the scene, about two years ago.
He then spoke to friends about it and learned they already had been making computer phone calls for some time. A banner ad on a Pakistani newspaper finally led him to the
MediaRing Talk software, which he thinks is the best program he's tested so far.
To dial out with MediaRing, he simply clicks on a person listed in his "speed dial"-like drop-down menu. Other programs allow you to type in a friend's E-mail address or his personal
Web "phone number."
Zia usually sends an E-mail to his folks in Pakistan to designate a convenient time to call, but impromptu calls are welcome, too. His computer will produce a light beep, and a dialogue
box will pop up identifying who's on the line.
The MediaRing window resembles a floating cell phone on your desktop and, like similar products, the software sports a slew of useful features. A handy answering machine keeps a
log of all incoming calls and stores virtual "Voizmail" messages, while a pop-up window for text-based chat is just a click away when the Internet gets congested and calling clarity
disintegrates.
Zia said, "It's a pretty cool software."
To start making phone calls and bypassing the usual long-distance telephone charges, all you need is a decent multimedia PC, a connection to the Internet (a 28.8K modem will do,
but 56K or cable modems are preferable) and a $10 microphone. For the most natural conversation it's also best to have a full-duplex sound card in your machine and to wear
headphones so the person you're calling doesn't hear his voice echo back through the microphone. Once your hardware is in place, you and a friend simply need to download an
Internet telephony program off the Web and register yourselves.
The good news is that there are many programs that are completely free to choose from, including MediaRing Talk (http:// www .mediaring.com [http://www.mediaring.com]), FreeTel
(http:// www .freetel.inter.net/ [http://www.freetel.inter.net/]) and NetMeeting (http:// www .microsoft.com/windows/netmeetinLine [http://www.microsoft.com/windows/netmeetinLine] is
overdrawn g/), so you can experiment to see which has the best voice quality and comes with the bells and whistles you desire. Most sites also feature detailed cyber-instructions to
help new users install and operate software. As always, the best piece of advice for optimum results is to make sure your computer meets the product's system requirements before
you start to download.
Scott Buckley is the product manager of Professional Services at VocalTec, which offers a telephony software called Internet Phone (http:// www .vocaltec.com
[http://www.vocaltec.com]). According to Buckley, telephony software usage is increasing. Some two million people have downloaded Internet Phone since VocalTec launched it in
1996, and currently about 450,000 people use it on a weekly basis.
Although Internet Phone is not completely free -- users must purchase the software for $50 (U.S.) after a free two-week trial period -- Buckley said he's seen a tremendous growth in
callers over just three years, especially among those who want to reach out and kibitz with family in distant places.
As with any telephony software that relies on the Internet , Buckley said, "Voice quality can vary, depending on the network that you're using."
Audio may be clear during one call, but online traffic jams can produce packets of choppy sound that get delayed. However, Buckley said, most people are willing to tolerate changes
in a familiar voice from call to call as long as it means saving a bundle on their phone bill.
Behaviorally speaking, it seems impossible that generations will ever be able to unplug the device they have grown up gabbing on, slamming down and noodling around their fingers,
but Internet telephony and videoconferencing are pointing us down a new technological road whether we're ready or not.
According to Buckley, at least, they indicate the trend of the future : convergence.
Document glob000020010827dv9r01dpk

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

177/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

OFF WITH THEIR (TALKING) HEADS
The Globe Review

Takin' it to the Net At last week's WTO summit, the alternative media bypassed mainstream sources to get their message out
on the Internet
SIMONA CHIOSE
986 words
6 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
R4
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Last Tuesday night, Kalle Lasn was in Seattle, just one of the tens of thousands protesting against the meeting of the World Trade Organization. Everywhere the editor of Vancouver's
Adbusters magazine looked, every time there was a confrontation, someone took out a video camera or a notebook. These journalists ' videos and stories weren't destined for the
airwaves of CNN or the CBC, for the pages of The New York Times or The Washington Post. Instead, their stories were going to be uploaded to the Internet and transmitted through
satellite to public-access television channels around the United States.
"People were reporting their own confrontations. Back in the Sixties, there weren't videographers. If you took a picture, maybe it was a snapshot to show to your friends. The Net is a
way for people to tell their stories to the whole world," Lasn said.
Like the intrepid press team of journalist Terry Southern, French writer Jean Genet, and counterculture icon William Burroughs, who covered the 1968 Chicago Democratic
convention for Esquire magazine, the alternative press in Seattle was made up of journalists who were half journalists and half activists in their own right. But unlike their
predecessors, they were armed with far more than a notebook and a pen. Not only did they carry video cameras, they got their words, sounds and images out to the world almost
instantaneously through the Internet and through satellite TV. Their reporting was often at odds with the mainstream and in retrospect, with the WTO talks failing, sometimes provided
more insight.
"The kind of information we [were] looking for [was] what kind of opposition [was] there to the agreement within the WTO meeting," said Brian Drolet, a member of Free Speech TV, one
of the organizations which covered the events. "The establishment media focused on isolated acts of violence; we pointed out they [were]isolated."
Despite the low budget the independent journalists worked under, their stories were also more likely than not to be highly watchable, another way to reach audiences tired of seeing
suited talking heads discussing trade policy. Drolet pointed to an older video of the leaders of the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico as an example of the indies' style.
"The director made it with a digital hand-held camera and it has interviews with Subcomandate Marcos and looks at the issue of free trade, but it is in the style of the MTV youth
aesthetic," Drolet said.
Like the majority of the more than 400 independent journalists who were in Seattle, Free Speech TV is associated with the Seattle Independent Media Centre. Journalists from
video collectives like New York's Paper Tiger TV, San Francisco's Video Activist Network, and Vancouver's Working TV, brought their just-filmed tapes to the busy storefront location
between Pike and Union. Using equipment that was far from state of the art, their tapes were spliced into a half-hour program. Along with the images, stories were constantly uploaded
to the site.
"There [was] a guy at the media centre whose job [was] to monitor the server," said Jesse Hirsch, of Toronto's Tao media collective, whose members were involved in documenting the
events in Seattle. "He just [sat] there and [watched] it melt down all the time because so many people [hit] the site."
Partly as a result, the issues the protestors demonstrated against got a much larger hearing than they would have if the mainstream were the only source of information.
"It reminds me of O. J. Simpson and the death of Princess Diana. It [was] such a spectacle, it overstepped everyone's expectations that it would garner this much global attention. It
may be premature to speculate on the impact of this event, but the debate has substance," Hirsch said.
And enough people looked to the Net for their information that some in the independent press are arguing that the mainstream media was forced to change its coverage in response
to the alternative viewpoints presented.
"A critical mass was reached when the press saw all these people running around with video cameras, willing to get arrested," said Julius Fisher of Vancouver's Working TV, who
contributed tape of the events in Seattle to the Media Centre's site. "They had to cover it."
Unexpectedly, the very medium the activists and journalists in Seattle used to co-ordinate, network and eventually distribute their stories, is also reputed to have been used by the
London police force before Tuesday's WTO protest in that city. The Observer newspaper reported that a private detective firm which monitors the Internet had predicted massive
disruptions because of the protest, partly sponsored by the Reclaim the Streets group, which has been using the Net to organize annual sit-ins around the world.
Still, the new forms of media may be shifting the balance of power. In a 1968 FBI memo, J. Edgar Hoover wrote that "activists must be exposed to public scrutiny through co-operation
of reliable media sources." Three decades later, the upstarts are predicting those reliable media sources are in danger of losing their audiences.
When Adbusters's Lasn came home, what he saw and heard did not match what he felt on the streets of Seattle.
"I started listening to the CBC and CNN and they just didn't get it. The CBC phoned up a professor at the London School of Economics and he was talking about how you can't
negotiate with people who slash tires. There will be a backlash against the mainstream media who don't try hard enough to get the real story out. The real story is why people [were]
there."
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dvc601r8u

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

178/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology

INTERFACE Selections from The Globe and Mail's Web site: www.globetechnology.com INCOME TAXES
The Globe and Mail
611 words
21 January 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
D2
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Should the government allow you to file your income taxes over the Web?
Yes 90% No 10%
Globe readers can't wait to file their income taxes -- over the Internet , that is.
Last week's on-line poll asked if the government should allow you to file your income taxes over the Web. Ninety per cent of respondents agreed, one of the most lopsided votes to
date.
Currently, Canadians can file their T1 federal income-tax forms electronically, but only third parties are able to submit them.
In the discussion forums on www .globetechnology.com [http://www.globetechnology.com/], most participants said they were eager to scrap their paper returns in favour of Internet
filing. But others said they were worried about the level of security on the Web -- and the job losses that electronic tax filing might spur.
This, and every week in Interface, we print the best of the submissions to The Globe's technology Web site. Trent Tucker Jan. 14. at 11:51 a.m.
Filing income tax is an information-transfer exercise and could easily be done using a secure connection. Isn't it really in Revenue Canada's best interest to facilitate E-filing as much as
possible? The costs associated with paper-based filing must be extensive. Guy D. Pattison
Jan. 18, at 11:56 a.m.
I think that it should be my option, but I prefer the security of a leased point-to-point connection rather than the World Wide Web . In the financial-services industry, we do not send
highly sensitive data to our corporate clients over the Web and vice versa, only via dedicated links. Charlie Stafford Jan. 18, at 11:37 p.m. Nothing is for free. E-Filing can be a
nightmare if not done correctly. Not all tax returns can be E-Filed.
E-Filing should not be available to individuals unless they too have to pay a fee and have to have the required program and obtain a licence to conduct that type of business. Khorn
Jan. 14, at 3:45 p.m.
We are already allowed to file by telephone. E-filing would be easier, as all the information would be up on the screen in front of you. This is far less confusing and possibly more
accurate than pressing a bunch of numbers on a phone's keypad and waiting for confirmation by a computerized voice. There could be many checks and balances for accuracy. Shelly
Lambe Jan. 15, at 4:54 p.m.
It's a matter of time before the government realizes the time- and cost-saving benefits of allowing your standard plebe -- like me -- the option of filing over the Internet . The technology
itself is getting cheaper every day. And I'm sure it would pay for itself. India
Jan. 19, at 10:09 a.m.
It's interesting how so many of you are ready to dispense with all the jobs associated with manual income tax filing. What about people performing those jobs? Isn't this a textbook case
of how technology removes jobs of a certain skill level, replacing them with automation and creating higher unemployment? David Tweddell Jan. 18, at 1:20 p.m.
Yes, it is definitely time. . . . At the moment, I prepare my taxes electronically (and get an accurate result), and then mail in a paper copy since it's cheaper than paying someone else to
do it.
THIS WEEK'S QUESTION
Has Apple created a design revolution with its Imac computer? Vote at www .globetechnology.com [http://www.globetechnology.com/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv1l003wn

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

179/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

National News

Plan to connect all public schools to the Internet is set for success Critics, however, question the benefits of rapid push to
go on-line
JENNIFER DITCHBURN
578 words
4 March 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
A13
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Ottawa -- The federal Industry Department is expected to trumpet later this month that it has achieved its goal to connect all of Canada's 15,290 public schools to the Internet .
But critics say the jury is still out on whether the rapid push to put teachers and students on-line has actually been beneficial.
SchoolNet has been one of the federal government's showcase programs, touted as evidence of Ottawa's commitment to give Canada a knowledge-based economy.
The program promotes the Internet in schools, and the advantages of gaining access to the wealth of research information on the World Wide Web . In select cases it provides
financial aid to get on-line.
SchoolNet is partly funded through Industry Canada, but also receives money from the private sector and the provinces.
Elise Boisjoly, director of the program, said teachers are now taking on collaborative work on lesson plans, projects and activities through the Net and contacting colleagues from other
jurisdictions.
Children have become more interested in school with the introduction of the Internet , and are learning new skills at a rapid pace.
"Kids have been incredible," Ms. Boisjoly said. "Some of the teachers change the way they are teaching in the classroom, and really became facilitators, and became a co-learner with
some of the students."
However, the problem with SchoolNet, says Marita Moll of the Canadian Teachers Federation, is that it exerted pressure on schools to go on-line without considering all the
implications.
Most schools don't have the money to train teachers to properly navigate the Internet , or the support staff to maintain the equipment, and haven't taken the time to identify how or why
they want to use the Internet , Ms. Moll said.
"It's very frustrating for the teachers because, on the one hand, there's an expectation out there that they're doing and using all of this stuff, on the other hand in most cases the
support mechanisms to do that are not there," she said.
"There's a big gap between the rhetoric and the reality. Even though SchoolNet says all the schools are connected, nobody -- not even them -- knows what that means."
At Woodroffe High School in Ottawa, computer science teacher James Zacour is one of a group of teachers helping students navigate the Internet . He said many students pack
computer labs at lunch hours and after school to use the Net, and often come to the classroom with more expertise than their teachers.
"We are going to have sessions after school for teachers to bring them up to speed with some of the changes , and make them more computer literate, to try to get them a little more
used to using the stuff," Mr. Zacour said. "It's still very new."
Ms. Boisjoly of SchoolNet acknowledged that while schools were encouraged to embrace the Internet over the past several years, they were also facing budget cuts that made it
difficult to make the best use of it.
"It's been a challenge for the school boards and the schools to see how they could make this a priority," she said.
"A lot of school boards saw the benefits fairly early on and decided to make the investments; some other school boards were more conservative."
Document glob000020010827dv3400bw2

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

180/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

BUSINESS

Technology --- Artists, recording firms face the music
Lydia Zajc
747 words
4 June 1999
The Toronto Star
TOR
1
English
Copyright (c) 1999 The Toronto Star

Along with songwriting, recording, touring and promoting, rock star Bryan Adams is also keeping an eye on how the Internet is revolutionizing the music scene.
More and more fans of every musical taste have turned to the Internet to satisfy their need for the newest releases before they hit the stores, for variety and old favourites. Inferior
versions can be downloaded for free - in other words, pirated without payment to music companies or artists.
While the big record labels are grappling with this mushrooming problem, millions of consumers and some new companies have simply gone ahead and created fresh ways to transmit
sounds to a computer and play them back.
Adams, who has written movie tunes and hits such as "(Everything I Do) I Do It For You" and "Cuts Like A Knife," knows he is losing money as increasing numbers of fans download
rather than buy, he told Reuters via E-mail.
At the same time, Adams, writing from his London home during a short break from his European tour, thinks the Internet can't replace live concerts.
"The Internet is fine, but people don't just want an E-mail from you, they want to see you and hear you," said Adams, who worked recently with the Spice Girls' Sporty Spice on his hit
"When You're Gone."
Last year, the major companies in the business launched a collective effort at creating standards for secure online music so they and the artists can get a fair share.
The collaboration, called the Secure Digital Music Initiative, or SDMI, seems to be moving so slowly that on May 26 several companies decided to strike out on their own.
America's AT&T Corp. and Japanese electronics maker Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd., along with record companies Universal Music and BMG Entertainment, said they'd build
their own technology, in accordance with evolving SDMI standards.
In the meantime, MP3 has become the most commonly used - but unofficial - format to encode digital music for downloading from the Internet .
The Internet has also created opportunities for new companies to fill the gaps by creating the technology while some music and technology companies fiddle.
"In the Internet , the early adopters have a lot more influence and a lot more say in bringing everybody else along because the early adopters set the agenda," said Siddiq Bello, who
publishes a weekly trade publication called MP3 Impact.
Bello thinks the established companies have largely resisted change or tried to circumvent it by selling CDs via the Internet , either the actual pieces of plastic or digital ones.
Larry Miller of Reciprocal Music, which is into digital rights management, is often asked about the future of the retail music industry. Like the dinosaurs, some major companies will
be rendered extinct, he says.
"It'll sure look different from the way that it looks today," he said. "Is that necessarily bad? I think it's just called the evolution of business. The best of them will get better. The worst of
them will go away."
Some of the winners will be the ones who create the new technology, according to Todd Sawicki at encoding.com, a company that helps create digital audio and video media.
Bello hopes consumers, who have been shut out of much of the SDMI process and company decision-making so far, will see cheaper prices as a result of the removal of retail outlets.
And struggling artists might strike deals more easily with record companies, backed by the knowledge that they have already built up a fan base of cybersurfers, Bello believes.
But companies must speed up the process to get to " digital nirvana," Bello argues. "The longer you wait, the more money you lose and the more the discussion is influenced by the
people who are doing it."
Sawicki warns there is no foolproof guarantee against piracy. "It'll never go away."
Afternoon announcer Tarzan Dan, at Toronto top pop station KISS 92 FM, points out people who buy their music the old-fashioned way outnumber consumers who have computers and
download music from a still-unreliable Internet .
"There's a sexiness to the aspect of going in and buying your favourite record, and seeing it there on the rack and being able to have it in your hands and be able to read all the liner
notes. That's why CDs are still doing very, very well."
Document tor0000020010830dv6400ikw

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

181/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

STOCK IN THE NEWS ANALYSIS
Report on Business: Money & Markets

Analysts log on to RealNetworks Unlike the rest of the Internet crowd, the company is expected to make money by year's end
DAVE EBNER
1087 words
20 July 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
B17
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

While myriad Internet stocks are flying in the stratosphere with multibillion-dollar market capitalizations, it sometimes seems few -- if any -- deserve to be there. At first glance, Seattlebased RealNetworks Inc. looks like just another Nasdaq technology stock that day traders go wild over.
But unlike Amazon.com Inc. and the rest of the Internet crowd, RealNetworks is going to make money by the end of this year, according to analysts' earnings projections.
Although it's still debatable whether RealNetworks deserves its $6-billion (U.S.) market cap, the company is faring far better than many Internet startups. Founded in 1994 by a former
Microsoft executive with a fortune in stock options, RealNetworks pioneered real-time Internet broadcasting software. Rather than downloading a bulky audio or video file before
playing it, RealNetworks's RealPlayer G2 displays pictures and plays sound with the simple click of the mouse.
The technology has become the standard on the Web: Eighty-five per cent of real-time media runs on a RealNetworks' platform. The company has 65 million registered users and
hundreds of content providers -- from CNN to Comedy Central, supplying more than 145,000 hours of news , music, sports and entertainment weekly.
RealNetworks lost $16.4-million or 10 cents a share on revenue of $64.8-million in 1998. (The bulk of the company's revenue comes from sales of the software that allows content
providers to convert their audio and video into the proper on-line format.) Analysts project that the company will lose a penny a share in this year and turn its first profit in 2000 with 16
cents a share. The boldest estimates see RealNetworks earning a penny a share this year and 30 cents next year.
"RealNetworks is the beneficiary of all the different trends on the Internet today. More E-commerce, more content, more users, cheaper service, better-priced PCs. All of that drives
growth for the company," said Vik Mehta, a New York-based Goldman Sachs analyst.
Mr. Mehta, who rates the stock "market outperform," said broadband -- the ability to deliver a far larger amount of information over the Internet than now possible -- is another plus for
RealNetworks. RealPlayer G2 provides high-quality audio coupled with mediocre video in a five-by-seven-centimetre frame. Once broadband is widely available in the next couple
years, the video quality will improve exponentially, attracting more users.
The broadband revolution , along with the Internet 's continuing growth, makes RealNetworks a "longer-term" investment, Mr. Mehta said.
Long term is a rarely used phrase when it comes to the Internet . Stocks bounce up and down like a five-year-old playing with a yo-yo for the first time. Companies explode and
implode with frightening regularity.
RealNetworks's stock, which closed down $3.12 at $83.50 on the Nasdaq Stock Market yesterday, has seen its share of volatility. After a steady and slow two-year rise to $50, the stock
shot to more than $120 in April. Within days, it was down to $60. It made one more leap to $100 before settling in the mid-$60 range in May and June. The rapid movement was fuelled
by investor speculation that the industry as a whole was about to post stronger first-quarter numbers than expected. RealNetworks, for the first time since it went public in November,
1997, was taken along for the roller-coaster ride.
Despite the industry's instability, RealNetworks still manages to inspire phrases such as long term.
"We think this is going to be one of the de facto winners on the Internet over the next three to five years," said Rob Martin, an analyst with Arlington, Va.-based Friedman Billings
Ramsey Group Inc. He rates the stock a "buy" and has a 12-month target price of $150.
"Obviously the Internet changes pretty rapidly," he said, "but I would say that a dominant position on 65 million desktops does not change as quickly as a couple months."
The biggest risk to RealNetworks, most analysts agree, is Microsoft Corp., a onetime Real shareholder and adversary. The risk diminished somewhat earlier this month when
RealNetworks signed a deal with Microsoft's WebTV to supply RealPlayer G2 to WebTV subscribers. The agreement was widely seen as a truce and an admission by Microsoft that
RealNetworks's technology was superior to its own. "A lot of people didn't expect Microsoft to acknowledge [RealNetworks'] leadership," an analyst said when the deal was announced.
"The fact that RealNetworks is developing a relationship with them is a good sign. They were enemies there for a while," said Don Sinsabaugh, director of research at New York-based
Robb Peck McCooey Group. "You know, Microsoft was going to crush them like they're going to crush everyone else. But RealNetworks had done its job in terms of updating its
technology and staying a step or two ahead of Microsoft."
Mr. Sinsabaugh, who rates the stock "neutral" and feels it is fully valued at its current price, said the recent deal doesn't mean RealNetworks can rest easy.
"I think Microsoft made a decision to be friend rather than foe, but that doesn't mean Microsoft isn't going to turn around tomorrow and take them out."
Although that is a possibility, analysts have a collective thumbs up for RealNetworks. In a Bloomberg News survey, 10 analysts rate the stock a "buy," and one rates it a "hold." There
are no "sell" recommendations.
Bottom Line
With profit on the visible horizon and control of almost all of its market, analysts agree RealNetworks is a solid Internet company.
REALNETWORKS INC.: VITAL STATISTICS
Head office: Seattle Telephone: 206-674-2700 Website : www .real.com [http://www.real.com/]
Nasdaq symbol: RNWK Business: A leading provider of branded software products and services that enable the delivery of streaming media content over the internet and intranets.
Share values ($U.S.)
Trailing 12-month earnings per share
-90cents
52-week high
$123.50
52-week low
$8.75
Last close
$83.50
Change from previous
-$3.12
1-year total return
296.44%
19-month average annual return
298.39%

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

182/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Top mutual fund holdings
% of total market value, as of Mar. 31
Fidelity Focus Technology
2.1
Source: Bloomberg Financial Services; Globe Information Services;
www .globeinvestor.com [http://www.globeinvestor.com/]
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv7k011fb

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

183/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

The Globe Review

Readers cuddle up with a good byte THE E-LIT EXPLOSION Despite skepticism about the future of electronic books,
publishers are frantically digitizing their backlists to prepare themselves for a widely expected surge in demand from young
readers
DOREEN CARVAJAL
882 words
10 December 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
R12
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Rarely does anything between covers astonish a librarian like Dennis Dillon, but he says he is shocked when he examines the latest reports about reading patterns of students at the
University of Texas at Austin.
Circulation is down. Turnstiles are moving at a slower pace at the most populous campus in the United States. But with a bare minimum of promotion, the university's newly purchased
electronic books, such as From Barbie to Mortal Kombat or Euthanasia: A Reference Handbook,are suddenly circulating like freshly published Grisham novels.
"No one was sure whether anyone was going to read any digital books," said Dillon, the university's head of collections and information resources. "We were somewhat skeptical.
Usually a book has a one-third chance of being checked out. So to have some title checked out 25 times in two months -- that's shocking."
With a $1-million (U.S.) budget for digital materials, the University of Texas is preparing to increase its 6,000-title collection of digital books. It is investing in the evolving electronic
frontier of the book market, which is preparing for rapid change despite widespread skepticism that the vast majority of readers are truly ready to cuddle up to a good byte.
New players like netLibrary -- which sells collections of digital books to libraries -- are engaged in a frantic international race to convert paper books to bytes with the ultimate goal of
dominating the evolving market.
And traditional publishers are cautiously preparing for an uncharted future , digitizing thousands of old backlist titles in preparation for an E-new world where books can live forever
because they will never go out of print .
A number of major publishers here and in Europe are preparing for the possibility of a surge in demand for electronic books that many believe could be driven by the same type of
readers that powered the paperback revolution : the young.
As the market develops, the definition of a book is evolving into an exotic collection of literary hybrids -- electronic titles that can be read as E-mail, retrieved by a portable electronic
reading device, downloaded to a computer or converted quickly from digital versions into bound copies that can be printed in less than 30 seconds.
And in the very near future , readers will be able to mince these digital versions into customized titles available by the chapter or page. For example, in the next six months, readers
of IDG's Arthur Frommer's travel guides will be able to create am electronic book so narrow in scope that it explores restaurants in the Loire Valley in France with reservation links to
recommended hotels or airlines.
With the immediacy of electronic books, digital titles can be published at greater speed and at greater peril for unchecked information. The forms of writing in electronic versions are
shifting, allowing authors to create never-ending electronic books with constant revisions or expanded titles that include the literary flotsam of notes, diary entries, memos, images and
maps.
Not everyone agrees as to when this new future will take hold. Technology giants are boldly promising swift change , with Microsoft predicting that many E-titles will outsell their paper
cousins within a decade.
Random House, the largest publisher in the United States, is not making the same boasts, but the company, part of Bertelsmann, has embarked on a two-year project to digitize all of
the books on its entire backlist of 20,000 titles, with 5,000 already converted.
And last month, the U.S.'s biggest bookselling chain, Barnes & Noble, purchased a 49 per cent stake in iUniverse.com, a new electronic vanity publisher in Campbell, Calif., that
charges a modest fee to would-be authors to post manuscripts in electronic versions.
NetLibrary has outposts in China, India and the Philippines where workers are converting books to electronic copies by typing the text into computers. Scanning the material directly
into a computer posed too much potential for errors, according to the company. And so now the digital versions are copied in other parts of the world and then edited and refined by
"book builders" at netLibrary's rapidly expanding headquarters in Boulder, Colo., where two shifts of employees work, from 7 a.m. to midnight.
Already there is some restiveness about whether this new technology will produce wider selection or simply digital slush. And one very basic question that all these companies must
confront is whether readers will warm to the new forms, particularly older readers.
"I'm 48, and for me I can't do it," confessed Dillon, who is still in charge of amassing electronic titles for the University of Texas. "But my kids are in high school and they read books
from beginning to end on the Web."
"We're willing to put the money there because we're guessing that's what will happen," he said of student demand. "It's getting harder and harder to get them to go into their car to
come to the library."
Document glob000020010827dvca01s3w

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

184/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

THE DIGITAL DARKROOM
The Arts

Capture summer on a disk Cameras: smaller and more sophisticated
JACK KAPICA
2669 words
7 August 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
C5
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Traditionally, men buy the cameras and women organize the photo albums. But digital imaging is changing that.
According to a survey of Canadian photo habits recently conducted for Kodak by the Environics Research Group, organizing digital images is becoming a more masculine activity -while 73 per cent of women organize the family photographs, only 54 per cent of them say they do it with digital pictures.
Blame the technical work involved. Digital cameras don't use film. They store pictures in electronic memory -- special cartridges, disks or little metal wafers called flash memory cards
-- and are therefore a little more complicated to use than film cameras. And printing digital pictures requires considerable time in front of the computer fiddling with the images -- at
least it takes more time than going to the local one-hour photo-processing emporium.
That shouldn't last long. Fiddling with the images is fun. Besides, cameras, printers and software are getting much easier to handle. What follows is a selective look at some of the new
products to help capture those family moments during the August vacation.
Fuji MX-600 ($1,125) and Fuji MX-2700 ($1,369): The Fuji MX-600 and MX-2700 are sleek, up-market cameras housed in brushed-aluminum-alloy cases.
The MX-600 (1.5 megapixels) is designed like traditional cameras, with a zoom lens (equivalent to 35 to 210 millimetres), as well as a macro function for close-ups, but no "burst
mode," a feature that enables you to take several pictures in quick succession with one press of the shutter. What it lacks in some features it makes up for in flexibility. The MX-600 can
be operated in fully automatic mode (auto focusing, auto exposure and speed), as well as a manual mode (allowing more precise control over the use of flash outdoors and indoors).
There are also built-in special effects, such as a soft-focus filter for glamour shots.
The MX-2700 (2.3 megapixels) is about as sophisticated a camera as any home user needs. A tiny thing (slightly larger than two decks of poker cards), it weighs just 240 grams, not
too much for a shirt pocket.
Its vertical design makes it a little different from its little brother, but the controls are handy and simple enough to understand. The compact design, however, forbids a continuous zoom
lens; instead, there are three prefixed focal lengths (wide, normal and telephoto). And, like the MX-600, it has automatic and manual modes.
Both cameras come with a rechargeable lithium-ion battery (good for 250 shots per charge) and an AC power cord. The MX-600 and MX-2700 also have the fastest shutter action of
any of the cameras tested here, though they come with a slow serial-port connector for linking to a computer. Extra accessories include a gizmo that looks like a floppy disk with a slot
in it for one of the flash cards used by the camera to store pictures; insert it into a floppy drive and it will download the pictures. Epson PhotoPC 750Z ($1,249): Epson has tied its
superb Stylus 750 photo printer to the PhotoPC 750Z camera (1.25 megapixels), though they are purchased separately. The camera is a little bulky but sits well in the hands, and all
the controls are in the right place. It has both a viewfinder and a "solar assist" monitor, a neat item that redirects sunlight into the back of the LCD monitor to increase the brightness of
the image in harsh light. Programming is logical.
The PhotoPC 750's zoom lens ranges from a standard wide angle to a medium-range telephoto, a macro setting for close-ups and a "panoramic" setting for narrow-and-wide shots. It
also features a burst mode that can shoot up to 16 pictures at the rate of two per second, though these pictures have to be taken at the lowest resolution (as with most digital
cameras, this one offers variable resolution, depending on whether you want a few high-quality portraits or many snapshot-quality images). A nice feature is that the camera can be
connected directly to its matching printer with a single cable, bypassing the computer.
It's a solid point-and-shoot camera but has one drawback: a long delay between the time the shutter is pressed and the picture taken. Kodak DC220 ($999) and DC260 ($1,299): Both
the Kodak DC220 and DC260 are large, serious affairs. Intended for business users, these cameras have a microphone to record a 10-second commentary with each picture, handy for
real-estate agents or insurance adjustors. There's a USB port for fast downloads and a connector for viewing images on a TV set. Another curiosity (on the DC260 only) is the ability to
stamp each picture with a custom graphic.
The DC220 (one megapixel) and the DC260 (1.6 megapixels) both boast quick shutter response. This means their burst mode can actually work at about three shots per second. And
both have decent zoom lenses, though the DC260's lens is wider and longer.
Both come with an eight-megabyte flash-memory card, cables and good software (including Adobe Photo Deluxe and PageMill, for Web publishing), but no rechargeable batteries.
Hewlett-Packard PhotoSmart C30 ($599):The PhotoSmart C30 (one megapixel) is surprisingly light for its chunky size and comes with a couple of welcome features: a four-megabyte
flash-memory card, and Hewlett Packard's own photo-finishing software that automatically downloads pictures whenever the camera is connected to a computer. The software has
another nice touch: Multiple pictures can be arranged on a single sheet of printing paper.
The PhotoSmart is matched with a printer and a scanner (see below). It also has a modest zoom lens and a noticeable delay in shutter release.
Agfa ePhoto CL50 ($1,249):The ePhoto CL30 looks like a traditional camera, a change after last year's interestingly shaped ePhoto 1680, which looked a little like a cigar-box robot
with a swivelling eye mounted on top. It is also a 1.3-megapixel camera; after software enhancement, it is the equivalent of 1.9 megapixels, good for enthusiastic home printing.
The camera features four resolutions, four flash modes, a continuous zoom lens, a panorama mode, a built-in microphone for commentary, and a burst mode. The camera's controls
can also be switched from automatic to manual, for greater control for advanced users.
The camera comes with cables, an eight-megabyte flash-memory card, a case and Agfa's own software that runs on both PC and Macintosh computers, but no rechargeable batteries.
Ricoh RDC-5000 ($1,299): The RDC-5000 (2.3 megapixels) looks unimpressive but is packed with features. A high-end product, it has both a viewfinder and an LCD monitor, a modest
zoom (the equivalent of 38 to 86 millimetres), and a "super macro" that allows close-ups of objects four centimetres away.
Other interesting features include automatic time-lapse photos, burst mode of one image per second and red-eye reduction.
The Ricoh comes with photo-editing and print -enhancing software from ArcSoft as well as entertainment applications that allow you to do hilarious things with your friends' faces.
Software: Internet link gets more elaborate
Adobe PhotoShop ($960): For years Adobe has been the leader in image editing and enhancement; PhotoShop has been consistently the easiest and the most flexible package, the
choice of professional designers. It can download images from all cameras and scanners that use the TWAIN protocol (the system used in image transfers), and it is a sophisticated
drawing tool as well.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

185/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Adobe has just released PhotoShop 5.5, which incorporates several features to make it more Internet friendly -- including the ability to embed Java Script coding in the pictures to
create computerized animation.
Also attractive is that it comes packaged with with Adobe ImageReady, software that creates Web sites, and the two are completely integrated, meaning they behave as one program.
It is the Rolls Royce of imaging software, but like a Rolls Royce, PhotoShop is not cheap. Adobe PhotoShop LE ($160): LE means "light edition," a stripped-down version of
PhotoShop. Like its big brother, it can download images from cameras and scanners. It is designed specifically for home users and business professionals whose needs do not run to
pixel-level colour adjustments. Adobe PhotoDeluxe ($79): This is an entry-level picture-editing package for those who have too little time to learn PhotoShop but want to edit images
quickly. It comes in two flavours: Home and Business, each tailored to its market with templates (for greeting cards and fun projects for families, or business marketing publications and
such for small businesses). MGI PhotoSuite II ($49.99): This package from MGI, a Toronto company, has so many features it's hard to believe the price.
It not only captures, touches up and transforms images with special-effects filters, it can create slide shows that run automatically, supply templates (for postcards, posters, magazines,
greeting cards and more), and organize pictures into electronic albums with captions (all searchable) and sound files. It can also automatically create Internet -ready pages for your
Web site (several templates are included) or output photos to a writeable CD-ROM. MGI supplies an on-line guidebook (at photostreet.com), with links to 1,500 photo-related sites.
The package is the best software for novices and serious amateurs at an unbeatable price. ArcSoft Imaging Suite ($145): ArcSoft's Imaging Suite is a collection of four applications
usually sold separately. Photo Studio is an image-editing and retouching package that will download images from scanners, cameras and the Internet ; it can enhance colours,
brightness and hue, add text, apply special effects or even create a screen saver. Photo Base is a tool for organizing images for easy retrieval or presenting them as slide shows with
sound. Photo Printer lays out images in multiple sizes on a single sheet of paper, which can save paper. ArcSoft Photo Montage ($145): Photo Montage is a novelty package that
contains more than 20,000 tiny photographs, which the program organizes -- according to their colour balance -- as individual tiles that make a mosaic of any photo fed to it. The most
famous example of this technique was a portrait done for a Time magazine cover of Princess Diana using only tiny pictures of flowers. Fortunately, the collection of tiny images can be
edited to include your own photographs, though it's hard to imagine feeding the program 20,000 personal images.
Printers/scanners: the prices are right
Epson Stylus Photo 750 printer ($569): The printer to beat for home printing is the Epson Photo 750, which features superior micro piezo ink-jet technology, allowing it to squirt tiny
drops that are six picolitres in size (one picolitre being one-billionth of a litre). The ink squirts out at cool temperatures; with Epson's own quick-dry inks, the images don't smudge. The
result is little splatter and more precise imaging -- only industrial printers are better. Using a cartridge with five colours plus a separate black cartridge, this model is unbeatable in its
price class. Hewlett Packard PhotoSmart printer ($219): Another printer that has a five-colour cartridge, plus black, the PhotoSmart delivers excellent prints for a much cheaper price.
The drawback is that, without quick-drying inks, pictures take three to 20 minutes to dry, depending on the paper, print -quality setting and humidity levels. On the positive side, it
comes with a cable, paper and software, including Microsoft's Picture It! lightweight editing package. Agfa SnapScan 1212u scanner ($229):The SnapScan 1212u is geared specifically
for family use, especially Macintosh users: It has a USB interface that plugs in as easily to an Apple iMac as to a PC USB port. With a resolution of 600 by 1,200 pixels per inch, it
should satisfy just about all amateurs -- and some professionals. It even comes with a version of Caere's OmniPage software, which allows you to scan printed pages and turn the
result into files you can edit. It's the best scanner in its class. Hewlett Packard S20 PhotoSmart Scanner ($699): Most scanners are limited to turning photographs or other pictures
("reflective media," in scannerspeak) into digital images, but the HP PhotoSmart Scanner does two other things: It can scan 35-millimetre film strips (positive or negative) and 35millimetre mounted slides. This is good for rescuing archival family material; it connects to a USB port, so scanning is not as slow a process as with parallel-port scanners. There is a
price for this flexibility, however: The scanner's maximum resolution is 2400 dots per inch (most home scanners these days run at 9600 dpi) and the maximum scanning surface is 5 by
7 inches (most other scanners run at 8.5 by 11.5 inches).
BUYING TIPS
Don't Wait. Waiting for digital -camera prices to fall is an exercise in frustration -- unless money is an issue. Cameras will keep improving and prices will drop only on antiquated
technology for the foreseeable future . Yes, today's top-of-the-line model will definitely be a boat anchor in three years.
Shop around. As prices drop, not every store will be nice enough to pass along the savings.
Analyze your needs. A macro function is necessary for those who want to take close-ups; "burst mode," at one picture per second or faster, is good for action shots.
Think pixels. The more pixels (units of image), the better the picture, and the larger the printed image can be. A "megapixel" camera has a million or more pixels and will deliver
excellent 5-by-7-inch pictures and acceptable 8-by-10s.
Look for a viewfinder. Some digital cameras have only an LCD monitor screen (in place of a standard viewfinder that you hold up to your eye), which is terrible for action pictures and
useless in sunlight.
Get on the bus. Cameras with a Universal Serial Bus (USB) connector will download faster than those through a serial port, the most common method.
Get an AC adapter. It will save on batteries during those long waits while the pictures are downloading to your computer.
Buy extra memory. "Flash memory cards," tiny sheets of metal that act as auxiliary memory, are usually extra, and can be expensive. But they're easier to store than film cassettes and
they're endlessly reusable, which means they will pay for themselves in a very short while.
PRINTER TIPS
Like cameras, printers measure their quality by the number of dots they print : The more dots, the better the quality. But while cameras give the total number of dots (pixels), printers
measure themselves in "dots per inch" (dpi). As a general rule for photographs, look for printers that can handle 1400 by 700 dpi or more. Go for quality, not printing speed.
Ink-jet printers, which squirt droplets of ink on paper, are best for photos. Colour laser printers are still too expensive for home use ($3,000 to $4,000).
Generally, printers with more colour inks will result in a better colour balance.
Do not scrimp on paper. Only the photo-like glossy paper will deliver acceptable colour. The slightly shiny, thinner stock is best for non-photographic colour art, and ordinary paper
should be used only for text.
Ink-jet technology is young, and no one really knows whether the inks will fade over time.
The real joy of printing your own pictures is control, not savings. The cost of the paper and ink cartridges will be about the same, or perhaps a little more, as sending a roll of film to the
local one-hour photo service. And a one-hour photo store is still much faster than a computer hobbyist.
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv87014vd

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

186/187

5/27/25, 10:09 PM

Factiva

Report on Business: Technology Careers

Companies sharpen Internet recruiting weapon Recruiting agencies threatened as employers, job seekers use Internet to
leapfrog traditional channels
SIMON TUCK

664 words
18 February 1999
The Globe and Mail
GLOB
Metro
T9
English
"All material copyright Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. "

Ottawa -- The Internet is on its way to displacing recruiting agencies as the corporate world's weapon of choice for finding skilled employees, a new survey has found.
The Internet is able to produce better reach and exposure, a faster hiring process and lower recruitment costs than agencies, the survey results indicate, and this may put recruiting
experts in a tricky spot.
"They have to change the way they've been doing things in recent years," said Yves Lermusiaux, chief of research at Ilogos Corp., the Ottawa company that conducted the research. "
[Employers] can find people directly on-line without going outside.
"They're at risk and they know that."
Mr. Lermusiaux said the most successful recruiting agencies in the future will likely be those that emphasize their ability to do things the Internet can't, such as pre-screening candidates
and mining data from on-line applications. Those unable to make the transition will become outsourced human resources departments for larger companies, or go will out of business,
Ilogos reported.
The Ilogos survey, based on data from 58 Canadian companies of various sizes, found that the Internet was becoming particularly pervasive in the transmission of resumes. For one
health-care position advertised in The Globe and Mail, for example, two resumes were mailed to the company and 161 were sent electronically, Mr. Lermusiaux said.
Companies, especially those in the technology sector where prospective employees are expected to have a high level of computer competence, are also finding the Internet to be a
handy and effective way to gather resumes.
Two high-tech companies told the researchers that they only accept electronic resumes.
"It makes sense [the technology companies] would be on-line [but] it's not just high-tech people any more."
Newspapers still account for the largest chunk of recruiters' budgets, eating up 39 per cent of the pie. But the Internet is close behind, accounting for 26 per cent, followed by job fairs at
16 per cent, head hunters at 11 per cent and campus recruiting at 8 per cent.
According to a 1998 survey, 21 per cent of job seekers use the Internet to find work, second only to newspapers , which are used by 50 per cent. Mr. Lermusiaux noted that many
newspapers , like The Globe and Mail, have created on-line job boards in an attempt to preserve their traditional dominance in job searches. That means that at least part of the
Internet 's 21-per-cent share is actually attributable to the on-line sites of newspapers , although the exact proportion can't be determined.
The new emphasis on the Internet is not difficult to understand. There are about 9.5 million Canadians with Internet access and more than 300,000 of them have posted their resumes
on-line. "We already know that using the Internet to look for work is one of the most popular activities on-line," Mr. Lermusiaux said.
Ilogos is also set to release next month a survey on the recruiting habits of Fortune Global 500 companies, a group that has led the trend toward on-line recruitment. In January, 1998,
Ilogos found that only 17 per cent of that group were actively recruiting on-line. Now, a year later, that figure has jumped to 45 per cent. Fifteen per cent of the Fortune 500 firms are
passive recruiters, meaning they post jobs over the Internet but encourage candidates to use fax or postal services to apply.
The Ilogos survey is considered to be accurate within one percentage point, 19 times out of 20.
Site seeing
www .globecareers.com [http://www.globecareers.com/] www .monster.ca [http://www.monster.ca/]
INTERNET GOES TO WORK
Internet recruitment 1998 Active recruitment: 17 Passive recruitment: 12 No recruitment: 57 No Internet site: 14 1999 Active recruitment: 45 Passive recruitment: 15 No recruitment: 31
No Internet site: 9
Illustration
Document glob000020010827dv2i00a8d
Search Summary
Text

((journalism OR news OR newspaper* OR "news media" OR "print" OR journalist*) AND ("internet" OR "online" OR "world wide web" OR "website" OR "digital" OR "www" OR "dot-com")) AND
(future* OR change* OR prediction* OR expectation* OR disruption OR revolution)

Date

01/01/1999 to 31/12/1999

Source

The Globe and Mail - All sources Or Montreal Gazette Or The Toronto Star

Author

All Authors

Company

All Companies

Subject

All Subjects

Industry

All Industries

Region

All Regions

Language

All Languages

Results
Found

1,893

Timestamp

28 May 2025 2:08 GMT
 2025 Factiva, Inc. All rights reserved.

https://global-factiva-com.lib-ezproxy.concordia.ca/hp/printsavews.aspx?ppstype=Article&pp=Print&hc=All

187/187

